BIOLOGICAL DETERMINISM AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION
Comment to Usenet group soc.feminism

David Mertz
January, 1997

  Lulu of the Lotus-Eaters [me] <quilty@philos.umass.edu> wrote:

    ...On the other hand--and more important, really--it doesn't
    work to act as if "homosexuality" is an objective trait of
    human beings apart from the socio-historical creation of
    categories of sexuality.

  Russell Turpin <turpin@cs.utexas.edu> wrote previously:

    This is a bogus complaint.  All (yes, all!) categories are
    human constructs.  Nature does not hand us categories; it is
    people who decide to measure height or effort or frequency,
    etc.  If Lulu is complaining that the category has fuzzy
    boundaries; well, so do most categories used in biology and
    medicine.

  Turpin is being dissimulative here (and in much of the
  deletae).  Or perhaps sophistical.  In any event, pointing out
  that all categories are human constructs is a banal (Kantian)
  irrelevancy.  Of course categories are human constructs, but
  the manner of their construction differs between categories.
  Some categories are constructed to describe objective essences
  (see Kant here, of course).  Other categories are constructed
  to describe performative acts of human beings.  It is simply a
  category error to act as if categories are just categories sui
  generis.  (There are lots more types of categories that I do
  not mention, of course).

  Of course, I argue that categories are of sexual-identity are a
  bit different than either type of category mentioned above
  ("objective" and "performative").  Turpin is welcome to
  disagree (which he could do reasonably) with me on my
  characterization of sexual-identity categories.  But it is
  tomfoolery to phrase such disagreement in an homogenous
  reduction of the category of "category".

  My particular characterization of sexual-identity categories
  are that their true semantic scope is strictly performative,
  but that in meta-categorical discussion, words like -gay- are
  TREATED as if they are objective categories.  In other words, I
  think most people make a category mistake when they talk ABOUT
  the category -gay- (and related ones).  This is not quite so
  obvious as if someone spoke of -yellow ideas-; but neither is
  there anything mystical in the assertion that a lot of
  (scientific) speakers make category errors.

  The example I give about party-membership, that Deborah May
  (sp?) repeats and appends with that of a "feminine desire to
  vacuum" are good examples historically conditioned categories.
  Unlike having a weight, being a Democrat is not something we
  could *in principle* assert of every historical person.  It's
  not the Pliny the Elder *WAS NOT* a Democrat, the question
  simply cannot arise (he certainly wasn't meaningfully a
  "non-Democrat" either in the sense that a 20th C USA'n might
  choose to be).  On the other hand, it is also not an EPISTEMIC
  question at issue either.  Probably no one much has any idea
  what Pliny's weight was, but the category of weight is
  nontheless constructed (by humans) in such a manner as to have
  a priori in-principle application to Pliny.  To my mind, being
  -gay- is pretty much the same kinda thing.

  Yours, Lulu...
