BODILY DISCIPLINES
Comment to Usenet group soc.feminism

David Mertz
August, 1994

  Asad B. Sayeed wrote previously:

    Don't forget that body-building has, at least nowadays, a
    trend towards totally minimizing body fat--to appear
    "ripped".  I heard a report on the radio, recently, stating
    that most pro builders (most of them, in this category,
    male) have well below normal body fat percentages.  Some of
    them even start blacking out due to this starving, it is so
    unhealthy.  And I don't think that most women find them
    desirable, judging by the romance-novel cover men +), who,
    while muscular, are not generally "shredded" in that way; so
    the idea that anorexic women may have grossly misjudged what
    men really want may work in the same way for these men as
    well.

  Sayeed poses an interesting quandry for me; perhaps
  inadvertantly.  The first thing to note is that male
  body-builders do not undergo extraordinary manipulation of
  their bodies primarily, nor even significantly, because they
  imagine that their achieved form is most desirable to women.
  Some women DO, in fact, find the rippled body-builder
  appearance attractive, many others do not.  But the goal of
  body-builders is a much more abstract aesthetic.  They try to
  achieve a certain form as an "exercise in the possible" which
  allows them to utilize effort and dedication to attain a bodily
  goal.  My belief is that most body-builders are fairly
  conscious in their articulation of a goal and an aesthetic.

  One could claim that achieving the kind of muscle definition
  that body-builders seek is "trivial", or that it is not the
  most healthful manipulation of their bodies, or that the
  pursuit is "not intellectual".  But if one wants to claim this
  of body-builders, one better be prepared to make the same claim
  of participants in nearly ANY sport.  Sprinters, or swimmers,
  or marathonists, for example do not try to cross distances with
  maximum speed for any reasons escaping the above criticisms.
  An Olympic sprinter doesn't train significantly in order to be
  the most sexual attractive.  S/he does not manipulate and hone
  her/his body because that would be maximally healthful (it's
  not overall *bad*, although there are many injury risks which
  could be avoided with a less frevent regime which would have
  the same cardiovascular benefits).  Running a distance in the
  shortest time is not an achievement of the intellect.  Exactly
  as with body-builders, a sprinter wishes to run a distance in a
  short time, BECAUSE S/HE CAN!  IMO, this is enough reason.  An
  aesthetic goal, however arbitrary it is at a certain level, is
  no less worthy for involving a honing of bodily form than is
  one involving the honing of an external material, or of a type
  of comprehension.  Chess is a worthwhile human aesthetic
  pursuit.  So, for the same reason, is playing music.  So, for
  the same reason, is understanding transfinite sets.  So, for
  the same reason, is running a distance in the smallest time.
  And so, for the same reason, is achieving the greatest possible
  definition of ones musculature.

  Here's where the problem comes in to my thinking, at least
  apparently.  Anorexia involves a dedication and bodily
  discipline not dissimilar to body-building (or other sports).
  Like body-building, the goal of the discipline is the
  acheivement of an abstract aesthetic form.  So why is IT bad?!
  The easiest answer seem to be that anorexia is not a
  consciously chosen and articulable goal, but rather a form of
  self-deception and compulsive harm to self.  As such, I can
  accept criticisms of anorexia.  But is this always what it is?
  Do models always deceive themselves as to their actual size?
  Do other women (or men) always so deceive themselves when
  making themselves "unnaturally" thin?  If self-starvation were
  pursued, after the manner of Kafka's Hunger Artist, as a
  self-conscious aesthetic, I could simply not accept banalities
  about its potential harm as criticisms.  Artists suffer for
  their art; and there is even something often enobling about
  this.

  Yours, Lulu...
