Response to Edward O. Wilson's,
"The Biological Basis of Morality," _The Atlantic Monthly_ April, 1998

by David Mertz
No Copyrot
April 1998


I. NATURALISTIC FALLACIES, REDUX.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  The fundamental problem with Wilson is that he can conceive of
  far too few things.  Explanations and understandings come at a
  great variety of levels, and in a great variety of guises.  There
  seem to be two crucial aspects of such plurality which Wilson
  misses.

  One simple insight of most moderately sophisticated philosophy of
  science is that sciences explain in myriad orthogonal levels.
  The true stories told by physics (whether by today's physics, or
  by some future physics which corrects today's mistakes) neither
  contradict nor affirm the true stories of sociology, or even
  chemistry (themselves, of course, subject to the same fallibilist
  caveats).  One type of truth may speak at one level of
  explanation, and another truth at quite a different level.  For a
  long time, the reductionist project epitomized in Lavoisier's
  remark of "tell me only the position and velocity of each
  particle in the present, and I can predict all future events"
  held sway in the hopes of scientists.  That is, it was a common
  belief of the 18th century (and some of the 19th) that every
  scientific explanation could be given the solid ground in being a
  consequence of the fundamental truths of the basic stuff of the
  universe.  As remarked below, Wilson seems not really much to
  have left 18th century hopes behind, albeit with biology serving
  as a higher level proxy for an ultimate physics.

  At a somewhat different level-though still not precisely that at
  which I will criticize Wilson-philosophers are in the habit of
  distinguishing between a "context of discovery" and a "context of
  justification".  In simple language, what historically,
  psychologically and accidentally leads to a particular scientific
  hypothesis is not at all the same thing that makes a hypothesis
  true.  A particular thought process of a scientist, for example,
  may be interesting to that scientist's biographers, or even
  generally to historians and philosophers of science, but the
  hypothesis itself, once committed to concrete enunciation, must
  still stand by its empirical verifiability.  The frequent subtext
  of this distinction is a defense of scientific explanations
  against the critics of scientists.  For example, particular
  scientists may be nasty and small-minded types who develop their
  scientific theories out of unpleasant prejudices; but the
  theories themselves, once they come into this light-of-day no
  longer carry a taint of their origin.  A simple concrete example
  is Karl Pearson's pivotal work in statistics (the correlation
  coefficient or the chi-square, for example).  Pearson himself was
  motivated in part by a wish to prove the innate inequality of
  human intelligence (with a bit of a racial bent here).  He was
  wrong in his motives, and the correlation coefficient is just as
  sound for that.

  With this digression, let's return to where Wilson goes astray.
  His wish is to "[search] for an origin of ethical reasoning that
  can be objectively studied."  All fine and well, as far as it
  goes.  Wilson's own explanation leans more heavily on biology
  than I would wish, but the general framework is unassailable:
  ethical beliefs evolve out of the nature of the human organism,
  and through the cultural and social development of such
  biologically specific beings.  Wilson characterizes this,

    Strong innate feeling and historical experience cause certain
    actions to be preferred; we have experienced them, and have
    weighed their consequences, and agree to conform with codes
    that express them.  Let us take an oath upon the codes,
    invest our personal honor in them, and suffer punishment for
    their violation.

  Certain romanticist fantasies aside, no one could seriously deny
  the general outline of this explanation.  The only problem for
  Wilson is that his explanation has not the slightest relevance to
  ethics.  The biological or historical origin of ethical belief
  says nothing one way or another about its veracity or moral
  weight.  Yes, we believe such-and-such because of our genes (for
  example), but that doesn't tell us anything about the moral
  correctness of the belief.

  One can easily enough see the connection (and the differences)
  here with the context-of-discovery versus
  context-of-justification distinction.  Humans have discovered
  ethics, in a sense, because of our evolutionary history; but our
  first obligation in evaluating ethical systems is to disregard-or
  at least bracket-this origin.  Contra Wilson, you just can't get
  an ought from an is!

  An easy way, to my mind, of seeing the problem, is by moving it
  slightly over.  Let us ask, for a moment, not about ethical
  beliefs, but about mathematical ones.  There is no question that
  human's ability to engage in higher mathematics has roots in our
  particular biological and cultural evolution.  Certain Darwinian
  demands upon our distant ancestors gave us the kinds of brains
  which, after a few thousand years of cultural shaping and
  pressures, would produce the theorems of number-theory, logic and
  calculus.  A number of interesting stories could be told here,
  some of them perhaps true, all of them ultimately subject to the
  weight of empirical testing, about why humans, but not other
  animals, have written theorems.  Perhaps certain social relations
  of hominids required a kind of abstraction from individual family
  relations which ultimately led to a general capability for
  abstraction.  Or perhaps the manual dexterity of humans, and
  their early tool use, required an abstract thinking about parts
  which could make tools.  Within an historical, rather than
  evolutionary, time frame, we might probably make some remarks
  about the mathematical requirements of societies which produce
  and distribute agricultural surpluses.  Whatever the stories
  Wilson or I initially imagine, some such stories are no doubt
  true.

  It just is not, however, the causal history of human mathematical
  thought which makes Wiley's proof of Fermat's Last Theorem true!
  What makes the proof true, is the soundness of its steps and the
  coherency of its conceptual objects.  In a Kantian sense, any
  thinking being able to comprehend Wiley's proof would be equal in
  establishing the veracity of the proof.  Such beings might be
  angels or pixies, or they might be the odd life forms evolved on
  Mars or Ganymede according to quite different evolutionary
  pressures.  It is the lifestyle of primitive hominids which
  precipitates the ability of humans to develop the proof, but the
  proof is equally veridical to any thinking being, whatever its
  particular evolutionary history.

  Just as much as evolution (biological or cultural) puts humans in
  the habit of realizing mathematical truths, it also puts us in
  the habit of believing some mathematical falsities.  Some
  interesting work on conceptual mistakes (or a very roughly
  "mathematical" sort) has been done by Tversky and Kaneman.  One
  fairly good example is a story "problem" like the below (told in
  rough paraphrase from memory):

    Jane lives in an upper-middle class suburb of Chicago.  She
    is a board member of the Chicago ACLU, and volunteers on
    weekends at a drug-rehabilitation center.  By occupation, is
    Jane more likely to be:
    - (a) A lawyer
    - (b) A doctor
    - (c) A criminal defense lawyer
    - (d) An accountant

  The punchline to this example is that more respondents respond to
  such a "problem" with the answer (c) than with the answer (a).
  However, given that (c) is a strict subset of (a), and the
  question is of probability of set membership, it is simply a
  mistake of mathematics to select (c) given the range of options.

  The explanation which Tversky and Kaneman give for this type of
  thinking concerns humans' tendency to cluster ideas together as
  part of cognition.  This is sometimes called stereotypic thinking
  (without the negative connotation the word stereotype has in
  other contexts).  Individual concepts are not thought
  individually, but rather in series of relations of proximity with
  other ideas.  The concepts of "ACLU board member", "volunteer at
  a drug-rehabilitation center", and "criminal defense lawyer" are
  ones many people hold fairly close together as part of a
  stereotype.  Certain attributes we find in an entity (including
  an hypothetical one) trigger associations with other attributes,
  and affect our judgments about the likelihood of those other
  attributes.  At times, this way of thinking leads to plain
  logical mistakes.  It is easy enough to imagine an evolutionary
  story of human mental evolution which traces conceptual thinking
  from cruder to more sophisticated abilities to group and
  associate like ideas together.  This associative ability might
  well have served the competitive advantage of hominids the
  greater its development.  In fact, it might well be this sort of
  conceptual development which, in a general sense, allows humans
  to think all the complex thoughts about mathematics, logic and
  science which we do.  On the other hand, under this scenario, it
  is this very same developmental history which inclines us to a
  certain class of conceptual errors.  Still, for all that, however
  deeply built into our genes such fallacious tendencies might well
  be, they are still errors.

  And so it is with ethics.  And so also we can see the relevance
  of orthogonality.  Ethics (or mathematics) just simply explains
  at a different level than does its causal history.  It is not
  uninteresting to inquire into the causal history of ethics in
  humans, but when one does so one is doing something different
  from ethics.  To remark as I do is to take no stand on the proper
  basis of ethical thought-or indeed that it has one.  Ethical
  dictates might have a transcendental basis and thereby operate at
  an orthogonal level to causal histories of ethics.  On the other
  hand, ethical dictates might have strictly what Wilson oddly
  calls an empiricist basis[1] and likewise be orthogonal to their
  causal histories.  Carrying the matter further, ethics need have
  no real veridical basis at all to remain orthogonal with the
  causal history of ethics.  The truths of astrology are few to
  none, but however few the truths be, the statements of astrology
  should not be judged by the causal/evolutionary history of
  astrological thought.  By that standard, we should little be able
  to distinguish astrology from behavioral psychology, both
  certainly originating in a facility to generalize and comprehend
  human behaviors.  Astrology (and perhaps ethics) is false, but
  Wilson stands in the wrong position from which to make this
  judgement.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
  [1] A better word would probably be constructivist', or perhaps
  'positivist' (in the sense of legal positivism).  Empiricism, to
  me, always seemed to denote the doctrine that concepts have their
  whole basis in precepts, and derivatively that empirical
  scientific inquiry is the best way to go about acquiring
  knowledge.  It's opposite is rationalism (precepts coming out of
  concepts), not transcendentalism.  Transcendentalism, at least as
  Kant has it, would try to walk the line by intoning that
  "concepts without precepts are empty, but precepts without
  concepts are blind."  Of course, 'empiricism', with its modern
  resonances of brass-tacks science, is a word with which Wilson
  would rather claim an association.  In any event, empiricism
  proper, as near as I can tell, should be rather agnostic about
  which side of Wilson's ethical transcendentalism fence to fall.


II. JUST-SO STORIES.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Wilson's evolutionary tales always seem to have a bit of Kipling
  in them.  One feels in reading his human evolutionary scenarios
  that, yes, the story is possible.  But one never at all feels
  that Wilson's stories are necessarily true ones.  Wilson's
  knowledge of anthropology, archaeology, and hominid paleontology
  are simply that of an amateur with an expertise elsewhere.  He
  can speculate about hominid evolution, just as I, or anyone, can
  speculate about hominid evolution.  But outside of the ethology
  of social insects, Wilson's stories are nothing special.

  Wilson's just-so stories are actually probably forgivable for a
  popular journal like The Atlantic Monthly.  Here they can be
  taken as illustration only.  The problem is that Wilson's
  "scientific" works are just as rife with such imaginings.  Still,
  let's take a look at a rather crucial story within the article
  under discussion.  It plays a somewhat pivotal, albeit somewhat
  covert, role in Wilson's overall argument,

    Imagine a Paleolithic band of five hunters.  One considers
    breaking away from the others to look for an antelope on his
    own.  If successful, he will gain a large quantity of meat
    and hide-five times as much as if he stays with the band and
    they are successful.  But he knows from experience that his
    chances of success are very low, much less than the chances
    of the band of five working together.  In addition, whether
    successful alone or not, he will suffer animosity from the
    others for lessening their prospects.

  It's a nice story.  It explains why people should have evolved
  genes for cooperation and sociability-traits which are sometimes
  exhibited in humans, and of which I, like Wilson, approve of and
  would wish to encourage.

  On the other hand, here is another story with about as much
  evidence from the archeological record,

    Imagine a Paleolithic band of five hunter/gatherers.  They
    hunt for small animals like rabbits which are relatively
    plentiful and gather nuts and berries from wild plants.  One
    considers breaking away from the others to look for food on
    his own.  He knows from experience that he is above average
    in his rate of gathering food and resources.  By going on his
    own, he will no longer have to share his food and resources
    with those who gather them less well.  In addition, by being
    successful alone, he will gain the respect and deference of
    the others for his great abilities.

  This is a less nice story, at least from the point of view of its
  "ethical" implications.  Under a slightly different, but equally
  plausible, evolutionary scenario, the best-and-brightest of each
  generation of hominids will be attracted to solitary activity.
  The only members attracted to cooperation are those with the
  worst survival abilities-and this situation will certainly, over
  thousands or millions of generations, lead to the elimination of
  the genes of the "cooperationists."

  Neither of these stories is likely to be precisely accurate, nor
  certainly is either exhaustive.  It is clear from the most basic
  observation that humans sometimes cooperate and sometimes
  compete.  We are sometimes sociable and sometimes solitary.  All
  these variations are certainly within the possible behavioral
  range of humans.  Either simple story above-or any of the many
  like them-would conclude by logic that the behaviors we observe
  everyday could not be within the human bio-behavioral repetoire.
  So real stories must be a lot more complicated.

  The subtext of Wilson's article, and of his sample evolutionary
  story, is that humans in our genes have inclinations to act in
  ways which right-thinking people like Wilson and readers of The
  Atlantic Monthly find generally "ethical" to start with.
  Whatever its apparent logical structure, Wilson's article would
  not have been written or published if there were not supposed a
  certain consilience between the brand new ethics Wilson is
  "discovering" and the old-fashioned ethics which most of us
  educated Westerners generally believe already.  If some
  biological story-say one with actual evidence behind it-told of
  the strong evolutionary pressures in favor of early hominids
  murdering each other at the slightest whims, Wilson would
  certainly not be claiming that doing as our genes "tell us" is
  the right way to act.  The "discovery" only works if it tells us
  pretty much what we always knew.

  This is why Wilson's particular just-so story has to occur within
  the pages of his article.  Let readers tell whatever story we
  might imagine ourselves, and who knows what awful conclusions a
  biological ethics might bring us to.  But as long as the
  paleolithic hunters are pretty close in their behaviors and
  motivations to a boy-scout troop, all is well.  The sort of crude
  Hegelian inversion of saying whatever is (in our genes) is what
  ought to be (in our moral systems) only seems sensible as long as
  Wilson provides the proper guidance in describing the is.


RESOURCES
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  The source Wilson article may be found at:

    URL: http://www.theatlantic.com/issues/98apr/biomoral.htm

  Links to a variety of subsequent related discussion is at:

    URL: http://www.theatlantic.com/issues/99nov/9911sciencewars.htm

  An interesting looking article by that I found by accident is,
  Steve Rosenthal, _How Science is Perverted to Build Fascism_.  If
  nothing else, it is hosted at my alma mater, so I feel I should
  reference it.

    URL: http://www-unix.oit.umass.edu/~cscpo/eowilson.htm


