BETWEEN AN EPISTEMOLOGY OF GENDER AND A GENDERED EPISTEMOLOGY.
A review of Sandra Harding's _The Science Question in Feminism_.

David Mertz.
circa 1987

  Sandra Harding starts her book, _The Science Question in
  Feminism_, with a distinction between "the woman question in
  science" and that question named in the title of her book.  We
  shall find it useful to increase this to a tripartite
  distinction: between what we might call, "the question of women
  in science," "the woman question is science," and "the science
  question in feminism." On each of these questions there is a
  particular "answer" that feminists should like to give.  Harding
  gives the desired answer to the first two of these question, but
  as much as she would like to, is unable to give us any
  satisfactory answer to the third.  It would be useful to say what
  these desired answers are.

  Feminists who ask "the question of women in science" ask, in
  essence, why there are so very few, both today and in times past.
  Copious work has been done to show the presumption in this
  question is accurate, and a great deal has been done to show
  why^1^.  Harding gives us an answer why there are so few women in
  science.  This answer, though, however good it may be is much
  more historical than philosophical.  As a philosopher rather than
  an historian, I shall have nothing to say about it.

  The woman question in science" is the question of how scientists
  have treated and should treat women as an analytic or theoretical
  category.  Feminists argue, quite correctly, that many scientists
  (who have, not incidentally, been men) have come to conclusions
  which reflect sexist beliefs.  Harding is not the first to suggest
  that even to have a category 'woman' demonstrates that sexism is
  motivating the theory.  Again, we shall come back to what Harding
  says on this question.  However, this question is not as
  interesting, either to Harding or to the rest of us hoping for a
  radical feminist critique of science, as is the final one.

  "The science question in feminism" is the title of Harding's
  book, and hence, presumably the question of most interest to her.
  The answer which feminists qua feminists would like to give is
  that the methodology of science is inherently masculinist and/or
  androcentric.  Harding wishes she could give this answer.  On
  most every page we see this wish, both in and between the lines
  of text.  But, ultimately, Harding cannot seem to suggest in any
  satisfying way that the methodology of science is inherently
  masculinist and/or androcentric.  All she can do (or does in this
  book) is to express the devout, and admirable, wish to call
  science's methodology androcentric; point to and criticize the
  androcentric practices of actual scientists; and criticize
  science's methodology in ways which are not specifically
  feminist.  All of these things are worthwhile and important
  endeavors, but they do not live up to either the title or the
  stated goals of the book.  None of this is to say that a
  specifically feminist critique of science's methodology is not
  possible.  I believe such a critique is possible, and shall make
  some remarks about at least one way in which it could be pursued.

  Let us be clear on what is required by a specifically feminist
  critique of science's methodology.  This feminist critique is not
  merely a critique of "bad science," it is a critique of
  "science-as-usual." Harding introduces this distinction, and the
  distinction is important to understanding her attempts at making
  her more radical statements.  A critique of bad science would
  include criticism of the ways in which sexist or androcentric
  scientists have produced sexist and androcentric ontologies and
  metaphors.  However, a critic of bad science could still hold
  that stricter adherence to existing methodological norms could
  overcome the shortcomings of particular scientists -- or even of
  particular theoretical frameworks.  A critique of
  science-as-usual does more than this.  It recognizes, "the
  fundamental value-ladenness of knowledge-seeking and thus _the
  impossibility of distinguishing between bad science and
  science-as-usual_ (p.22)." That is: for the critic of
  science-as-usual, and this includes Harding, values must enter
  into every aspect of knowledge; there is no value-neutral
  knowledge.  I would tend to agree with this claim and shall press
  what I believe is a deeper claim, and one which Harding needs to
  pursue in order to make a critique of science's methodology
  viable.  Namely, there is something fundamental to human
  experience and cognition which systematically distorts all
  knowledge production.  I believe I shall be able to say what this
  "something" is.

  The value-ladenness of knowledge-seeking which Harding points out
  does not lead to a relativism which claims that for every set of
  values there is a different knowledge, and we have no basis for
  deciding between the knowledges.  Rather, Harding asks (expecting
  an affirmative answer),

    whether it is possible that some kinds of value-laden
    research are nevertheless maximally objective.  For
    example, are overtly antisexist research designs more
    objective than overtly sexist or, more important[ly?],
    'sex-blind' (i.e. gender-blind) ones?  (p.23)

  A feminist critic of science's methodology will probably claim
  that "women (or feminists, whether men or women) as a group are
  more likely to produce unbiased and objective results than are
  men (or nonfeminists) as a group (p.25)."

  Harding provides a good example of this.  Two hypotheses are, in
  some sense, in competition in explaining human evolution of tool
  use.  These are the "man-the-hunter" and the "woman-the-gatherer"
  hypotheses.  The former, and earlier, hypothesis was, as a matter
  of historical fact, developed by male scientists; and by
  scientists who saw men as active agents in society and women as
  passive receptacles.  This assumption gets played out in theory
  formation by framing the questions of human evolution in terms of
  the pressures to evolve on males of the species.  Once the
  question is asked this way, the only answer has to involve the
  hunting activity of men.  The "woman-the-gatherer" hypothesis was
  developed, as a matter of historical fact, by women and by
  feminists who are both women and men.  It is probably a better
  hypothesis, and is one that could only have been developed by
  throwing off androcentric assumptions.  Women and/or feminists
  are in a unique position to throw off these assumptions.  The
  hypothesis itself is merely a refocussing of attention onto the
  fact that women have always been responsible to provide a greater
  share of nutritional intake than have men.  There are reasons to
  believe that this was also true of our distant ancestors^2^.

  There are two shortcomings of Harding's claim that women (or
  feminists) are more likely to produce objective results, neither
  of which speaks against the claim itself.  The first is that
  Harding does not show that methodological norms of science are
  not in themselves sufficient to eventually overcome the
  androcentrism of particular scientists.  The second is that
  Harding does not even give any reason (beyond a kind of prima
  facie plausibility) to suppose that women scientists are any less
  infected with androcentric beliefs than are men.  I do not doubt
  that these matters can be shown, but Harding fails to do so in
  any clear way.  Just at the key juncture we are left to fill in
  the connections for ourselves.  Throughout the book Harding makes
  claims which are reasonable, and perhaps true, but fails to
  provide real evidence.

  Such an example occurs later in the book, in chapter 6. Here
  Harding is trying to give an example of a specific way in which
  feminine or feminist thinking differs from masculine or
  masculinist thinking.  She says,

    "[F]eminist thinking has produced a new comprehension of
    the relationship between organisms, and between organisms
    and their environment.  The organism is conceptualized "not
    in terms of the Darwinian metaphor, as the passive object
    of selection by an indifferent environment, but as [an]
    active participant, a subject of the determination of its
    own future."  (p.145)

  However, Harding leaves it opaque why this comprehension is
  feminist, even given that it is superior.  Barbara McClintock is
  said to share this conception, and she is, of course, a woman;
  but this surely does not suffice to call this "new comprehension"
  'feminist'.  Rather, the reason seems to lie in the discussion in
  the previous chapter of object-relations theory.  For those of us
  who possess only a passing familiarity with object-relations
  theory this connection is far less than clear -- and it is never
  spelled out in detail by Harding.

  Central to filling in the gaps I have mentioned, and the many
  more like them which have remained unmentioned, is a coherent
  theory of the differences in the conceptualization and/or
  cognition which women and men undergo.  We cannot say that women
  are more likely to reach objective scientific conclusions than
  are men, _until we can say how women and men are cognitively
  different._ A brief suggestion of this is made in chapter 5, in
  the discussion of object-relations theory -- but all that Harding
  does therein is repeat a few conclusions of a few thinkers,
  outside of any coherent framework^3^.

  In order to speak of the cognitive differences between men and
  women we need to have a framework in which to speak of human
  cognition generally.  I would like to, briefly, suggest such a
  framework -- one which will, hopefully, make some of the
  conclusion which Harding wishes to draw better supported.  In
  particular, I should like to point to two related ways in which
  human cognition (feminine or masculine) is structured:
  metaphorically and prototypically.  The metaphorical structure of
  human thinking is discussed by George Lakoff and Mark Johnson in
  their book _Metaphors We Live By_.  The prototype structure of
  cognition was shown in a systematic way by Eleanor Rosch^4^.  A
  review of both these topics is contained in George Lakoff's
  _Women, Fire and Dangerous Things_.

  To claim, as do Lakoff and Johnson, that human cognition is
  structured metaphorically is to claim that many concepts are only
  structured at all by virtue of being compared, implicitly or
  explicitly, to more familiar and more concrete concepts.  The
  concepts which most often serve as the objects of comparison are
  those which have the most direct experiential basis.  For
  example, the concepts which have perhaps the most direct
  experiential basis are those relating to spatial orientation.  It
  is no accident that our concepts of morality, emotions, etc.  are
  structured by an up/down orientational metaphor; and those of
  time, relationships, etc.  are structured by a front/back
  orientational metaphor^5^.

  The other manner which I shall mention in which cognition is
  structured is by prototypes.  A category does not pertain to all
  its members in the exact same way.  Rather, some one member or
  few members which are deemed the "best examples" stand
  metonymically for the whole category.  The fringe members are
  considered members of the category by virtue of having certain
  conventionally chosen similarities with the central members.
  This relates closely to "base-level categorization." Certain
  categories are learnt easiest and earliest; are the ones we use
  to name a given object, ceteris paribus; and have characteristic
  sensora and activity associated with them.  For example, if we
  see an animal we are more likely to say, "that is a dog," than
  "that is a mammal," or "that is a cockerspaniel." The category
  'dog' is learned by children before either the more general,
  'mammal', or the more specific, 'cockerspaniel'.  Further, there
  are particular actions (at the level of motor activity)
  characteristically associated with dogs, but none with mammals in
  general, or cockerspaniels in particular.  It seems plausible to
  assert that prototypically structured categories have as a core a
  base-level category, together with conventional rules for
  determining if another type of thing is similar in the "right"
  way.

  Harding is aware of these structures in cognition, at least
  within science.  However, she only points them out in regard to
  their effect in causing androcentric theories or hypotheses.  It
  seems plausible to assume cognition is structured metaphorically
  and prototypically, whether or not its conclusions are
  androcentric.  It naturally follows that when men do science, and
  must structure abstract concepts on the model of more familiar
  and concrete concepts, they do so from a masculine perspective --
  and these familiar and concrete concepts may be very differently
  structured by men and women.

  For example, let us look at what Harding says about traditional
  metaphorical structuring of scientific thinking:

    We will see assumptions that the audience for these texts
    are men, that scientists and philosophers are men, and that
    the best scientific activity and philosophical thinking
    about science are to be modeled on men's most misogynous
    relationships to women -- rape, torture, choosing
    "mistresses," thinking of mature women as good for nothing
    but mothering.  (p.112)

  Harding backs this up by pointing to the "rape and torture
  metaphors [for scientific inquiry] in the writings of Sir Francis
  Bacon and others (p.113)." Let us assume that, in fact,
  scientific inquiry has been structured by the more familiar and
  concrete (at least in Bacon's time) concept of rape.  This is a
  best case of androcentrism in science.  If the concepts of
  scientific inquiry are seen as sharing the structure of the male
  (rapist's) experience of rape, then women are closed out of
  understanding the way that male scientists experience the
  activity of scientific inquiry.  Notice here, that this is not
  merely a matter of the faults of individual scientists -- it is
  purported that the very activity of scientific inquiry is
  structured by the (male) activity of rape.  If the structure of
  the activity is not pertinent to methodology, nothing is.

  The counterpoint to this androcentric science is "a science
  grounded in women's experience (p.148)." According to Harding,

    The subjugation of women's sensuous, concrete, relational
    activity permits women to grasp aspects of nature and
    social life that are not accessible to inquiries grounded
    in men's characteristic activities.  (p.148)

  The reason for this remains unclear within Harding's book, but if
  we keep in mind the metaphorical and prototypical structuring of
  cognition, we can make sense of this.  Just as men have
  characteristic experiences which may be used to give structure to
  abstract concepts, so do women -- and it is at least possible
  that those experiences characteristic for women may serve as
  better guides for structuring scientific concepts.

  The greater interaction between organism and environment which
  Harding claims is characteristic of feminist thinking is thought
  by her to be, in some way, based of women's characteristic
  experiences.  It remains to be said what women's characteristic
  experiences are, and how these differ from men's.  The
  experiences of women, it should be noted, are not completely
  disjoint from those of men -- both women and men move around in
  the same world, have the same sensory and cognitive apparatus,
  and come in contact with many of the same objects.  Hence, more
  of the experiences which women and men use to structure abstract
  concepts will be the same than will be different.

  The main effect of prototyping which leads to androcentrism,
  presented in Harding's book, is in the very category of gender.
  Harding says, "women are assumed to be the bearers of gender and
  only men the bearers of culture [i.e.  uniquely human activity].
  (p.90)" The structure of cognition which underlies this kind of
  belief is prototypical.  The "best example" of the category
  'social person' or even merely the generic 'person' is a man.
  Hence, a gendered person must be a woman, or girl.  The
  prototypical person also has a race: Harding quotes Scott Hull,
  "All the women are white, all the Blacks are men .  . .(p.178)"
  This structure arises out of the base-level categories, 'man' and
  'woman'.

  Although, as Harding observes, "reproductive sex difference
  itself may not have always been commonsense observational givens
  [sic] for humans, (p.131)" it certainly has been for many hundred
  years in European society.  Even at the level of characteristic
  motor activity, children today are required to behave very
  differently towards women and men.  This forces gender upon us as
  a base-level categorization, and hence only one gender can be the
  best example of a person.  That this gender is men may be more
  that accidental.  Lacanian analysis insists that the very process
  of human development creates the system of gender, with the male
  gender metonymically representing the social order.  The only
  thing accidental is that biological males are placed in the male
  gender.

  Whether of not the Lacanian inevitability of casting men as the
  best example of 'persons' is correct, the effect of doing so is
  that social scientists study men and believe that they are
  studying persons in general.  Harding quotes Millman and Kanter,

    When male sociologists (or men in general) look at a
    meeting of a board of trustees and see only men, they think
    they are observing a sexually neutral or sexless world
    rather than a masculine world.  (p.90)

  The question remains, of course, whether women are any less
  likely to assume that men are the best example of persons; though
  probably feminists, either male or female are less likely to do
  so.

  Harding is not always on equally firm ground in accusing science
  of androcentrism.  For example, she says,

    The androcentric ideology of contemporary science posits as
    necessary, and/or as facts, a set of dualisms -- culture
    vs. nature; rational mind vs. prerational body and
    irrational emotions and values; objectivity vs.
    subjectivity; public vs. private -- and then links men and
    masculinity to the former and women and femininity to the
    latter in each dichotomy.  (p.136)

  We all agree that these dichotomies are posited, and even that
  they are equated with the dichotomy male vs.  female.  This does
  not constitute androcentrism, however; unless one claims that
  androcentrism is the sole basis of the base-level categories
  'male' and 'female'.  Women just as much as men, and feminists as
  well and nonfeminists concretely experience the base-level
  distinction, male vs.  female.  Perhaps in an ideal world this
  distinction would not be made on such a fundamental level; but
  given that it is made, it provides an obvious experiential basis
  on which to structure less familiar and more abstract
  dichotomies.

  The male vs. female distinction is not experienced in an
  identical way by women and men; and it is not the only
  experiential basis on which these abstract dichotomies could be
  structured.  They could all be, and perhaps should be, structured
  by any of the following distinctions: up vs.  down, friendly vs.
  hostile, close vs.  distant, etc.  However, even if we deeply
  believe that some other distinction would better structure the
  above dichotomies, or that they should not be made at all -- and
  even if we believe this qua feminists -- this does not imply that
  the structure imposed by the distinction male vs.  female is
  androcentric.

  Let me mention one more comment which Harding makes, and which
  requires, in order to defend, a framework of the sort I briefly
  describe.  This framework is only stated in bits and pieces, if
  at all, by Harding.  Harding says,

    [I]t is reasonable to believe that the selective focus on
    purported sexual sameness across species and sexual
    differences within species is not only questionable but
    also a distinct consequence of androcentrism.  (p.100)

  I do not understand why either women or feminists would
  necessarily have a different focus.  The manner in which the
  focus on sexual sameness across species probably comes about is
  through the base-level categories, 'female' and 'male'.  These
  are formed by our experience with human beings, but are extended
  to structure our experiences of other species.

  When the distinction man vs.  women metaphorically constitutes
  the structure of the distinction female vs.  male, in other
  species, it is natural to identify men with other males and women
  with other females.  Similarly, the differences within species
  across sex is a product of the experientially based base-level
  distinction man vs.  woman.  The only criticism of the focus
  mentioned in the above quote which is specifically feminist would
  be a criticism of the base-level categories 'man' and 'woman'.
  However, feminists are far from univocal in making such a
  criticism -- many feminists are specifically concerned to "praise
  the feminine," which certainly involves maintaining a very basic
  distinction between female and male.  Any criticism of the focus
  on sexual sameness across species which does not criticize the
  gender category structure will, most likely, fall easily within
  the methods of normal critical scientific methodology^6^.

  I should like to turn aside, briefly, to a tack which I think can
  serve to ground "a science grounded in women's experience." Women
  and men, from a very early age, experience the world in different
  ways.  The texture of the objects which infants handle differs in
  correlation with the gender of the infant (and I say 'gender' not
  'sex' deliberately -- infants are gendered in the eyes of society
  from birth, or before; even before they have a gendered psyche).
  The manners of handling objects which are reinforced differs thus
  also; as do the colors with which an infant is characteristically
  presented; the sounds which she hears (i.e.  human voices, which
  are in one tone to male infants, and in another to female
  infants); the way she is held and handled by other people; the
  actions toward other people which are reinforced; et nauseum^7^.
  Because of this, we should expect that girls and boys have formed
  significantly different conceptions of what characterizes
  absolutely basic categories such as, 'object', 'action',
  'person', 'cause', etc.

  For example, the base-level category 'person' is certainly
  defined in our cognition, at least in part, as "an entity (or
  whatever) toward which one (namely, myself) behaves in
  such-and-such a manner." But the manner specified must be
  different for those becoming girls and those becoming boys.
  Similarly, our most basic conception of what it is to be an
  object is shaped, in part, by the tactile properties of the
  objects which we first handled, and those which we most often now
  handle.  Who knows if women who had handled rag dolls as infants
  would have developed the same "_billiard-ball molecular theory_"
  as did men who had handled wooden blocks as infants.

  I may be committing something of an anachronism here, as I do not
  have any idea what sort of toys European babies of several
  centuries ago played with; but I think it is clear enough how
  this example illustrates conceptual differences between women and
  men.  It may be that the basic concepts which are characteristic
  of women (in our cultures, I hasten to add) would better serve to
  structure the process of some or all scientific inquiry.  I have
  no idea what a "rag-doll molecular theory" would be like, but it
  just might be a better one than is our traditional theory.  It
  would be specious to ask whether the suggestion with which I
  start this paragraph is a criticism of science's methodology.
  Methodology _simply does not enter_!

  A more feminine molecular theory would still, of course, have to
  be tested, examined for implications and coherency, etc.; but
  what seems to be at issue here is the "context of discovery" not
  the "context of justification," as we say in philosophy of
  science.  Methodological norms have rarely had anything to do
  with the context of discovery (except very recently, i.e.  in the
  work of Donald Campbell), and as I shall discuss below, the
  context of justification is equally free of methodological norms
  in actual practice.

  The final three chapters of Harding's book are concerned to deny
  the role of methodological norms within the context of
  justification.  These chapters, however, have very little to do
  with feminism.  Harding merely repeats the now familiar claims of
  the "radical" philosophers of science, notably Kuhn.  She wishes
  that these philosophers had something to say about feminism, but
  cannot quite get them to.  For example, Harding says that we
  should, in a Kuhnian way,

    understand knowledge-seeking as a fully social activity --
    one that will inevitably reflect the conscious and
    unconscious social commitments of inquirers.  From this
    perspective, it cannot be either merely accidental or
    irrelevant that most social studies of science, like their
    empiricist-guided ancestors, are loath to consider the
    effects on science of gendered identities and behaviors,
    institutionalized gender arrangements, and gender
    symbolism.  (p.201)

  We can agree that gender identities, et al., constitute part of
  the social commitments of scientists, past and present.  But
  these commitments are not the only ones which scientists have
  had, nor are they different in kind from other commitments.  All
  Harding really does is combine a respect for Kuhn with an
  unambitious claim: namely, "people are, and have been, gendered."

  The final, concluding chapter also seems singularly unambitious.
  This is representative:

    It would be historically premature and delusionary for
    feminism to arrive at a "master theory," at a "normal
    science" paradigm with conceptual and methodological
    assumptions that we all think we accept.  Feminist
    analytical categories should be unstable at this moment in
    history.  We need to learn how to see our goal for the
    present moment as a kind of illuminating "riffing" between
    and over the beats of the various patriarchal theories and
    our own transformations of them, rather than as a revision
    of the rythms of any particular one (Marxism,
    psychoanalysis, empiricism, hermeneutics, postmodernism .
    .  .) to fit what we think at the moment we want to say
    (p.244)

  What then are feminists to do?  Harding confines them to the
  margins of scientific practice; at best nipping at the heels of
  scientists when they are furthest misled by androcentrism.  For
  feminism to bring about, or even suggest, any substantial
  improvement in science, it must suggest a new scientific practice
  -- a positive, concrete way for scientists to carry out science.
  Harding eshews doing so.

FOOTNOTES:
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  1. See, for example, Margaret Rossiter 1982, _Women Scientists in
  America:  Struggles and Strategies to 1940_. Baltimore, MD:  Johns
  Hopkins University Press.

  2. See Adrienne Zihlman 1978, "Women in Evolution, Part II:
  Subsistence and Social Organization among Early Hominoids," in _Signs:
  Journal of Women in Culture and Society_.  University of Chicago
  Press, v.4 no.1; Nancy Tanner and Adrienne Zihlman 1976 "Women in
  Evolution, Part I:  Inovation and Selection in Human Origin," _Signs_
  v.1 no.3; Sarah Blaffer Hrdy 1981, _The Woman That Never Evolved_,
  Cambridge, MA:  Harvard University Press.

  3. To wit: Nancy Chodorow 1978, _The Reproduction of Mothering_,
  University of California Press; Dorothy Dinnerstein 1976, _The Mermaid
  and the Minotaur:  Sexual Arrarngements and Human Malaise_, New York:
  Harper and Row; Jane Flax 1978, "The Conflict between Nurturance and
  Autonomy in Mother-Daughter Relationships and within Feminism," in
  _Feminist Studies_ v.4 no.2.

  4. See, for example, Eleanor Rosch 1981, "Prototype Classification and
  Logical Classification:  The Two Systems," in _New Trends in Cognitive
  Representation:  Challenges to Piaget's Theory_, ed. E. Scholnick,
  Hillsdale, NJ:  Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; Eleanor Rosch 1978,
  "Principle of Categorization," in _Cognition and Categorization_, ed.
  Rosch and Lloyd, Hillsdale, NJ:  Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

  5. We say, for example that one has high or low moral stature; that
  one is feeling up or down; that the future is ahead of us and the past
  behind us; that a relationship is moving foreward or slipping
  backword; etc.

  6. Such a focus will, after all, eventually produce testable
  hypotheses about the actual gender differences in different species.

  7. Look at, for example, Parsons, Talcott and Robert F. Bales 1955,
  Family, Socialization and Interaction Process, The Free Press, Glencoe
  IL; or any intermediate sociology text covering gendering.

  Additional Texts:
  George Lakoff 1987, _Women Fire, and Dangerous Things_, University of
  Chicago Press.

  George Lakoff and Mark Johnson 1980, _Metaphors We Live By_,
  Universtiy of Chicago Press.

