_The Rule of Racialization_, Steve Martinot.  Philadelphia:  Temple
University Press, 2003.  Pp. xiii+240.  ISBN 1-56639-982-3.

There are certain optical illusions that are extremely resistant to
"demystification;" only by breaking them down into components too small
for recognition of the overall form can we escape their trap.  Yet as
soon as we add back enough atomized material to recognize the original
form, we cannot resist the illusion.

In Martinot's archaeology, the concept of race has much of this
irreducibly compelling deceit.  How can racialized persons be
constructed out of the raw material of people who differ only in
accidental individual qualities?  And how can an ideology of race emerge
out of a society without such a concept?

Martinot provides a fairly traditionally Marxist narrative of dominant
Capitalist classes molding naturalizing ideologies out of narrowly
economic interests.  But in contrast to a mere instinctive assumption
that a base/superstructure schema is appropriate, Martinot works out the
evolution decade by decade, law by law, commodity by commodity.  His
analysis--which remains generally specific to a US context of
racialization--traces the construction and condensation of racial
categories from the self-interest of 17th century Virginia Colony
landowners, through the whiteness "bargain" of the 19th century "free
labor movements", to contemporary forms like racial profiling by police.

The relation Martinot holds to Marxist terminology is ambivalent,
however.  He argues, convincingly, that racialization preceded and set
the horizon for the formation of (white) US class identities.
Certainly, Martinot finds rightly unconvincing a familiar identification
of race as a mere tactic for division of an authentic working class
identity.  Nonetheless, the history he presents is one of economic
relations, and roles in systems of production.  Violence, of course,
always played a central role in the maintenance of race, but even the
white "intermediary control stratum" are understood in generally
productivist terms.

If anything, even while finding race more fundamental than class,
Martinot perhaps is -too- productivist at points.  Or perhaps he is
lured by the enchantment of dialectical puns, e.g. discussing the
Jacksonian producer ethic:  "Both white working-class roles were
productive--of social wealth on the one hand and of the whiteness of
corporate society on the other.  (p.111)" While his whole book is quite
strong in its characterization of such economic and ideological duality,
I remain wary that an equivocation hides within such doubling of the
word productive'--I am quite willing to accept the economic centrality
of -ideological production-, but not on the basis of an attractive
word-play.  Nonetheless, Martinot generally succeeds in making a good
case that:

    The white working class was a product of economic (capitalist)
    property, yet defined by a social property (whiteness) through which
    it became the producer of the society of (that) property.  (p.99).

_The Rule of Racialization_ falls in the emerging field of "whiteness
studies"--of a piece, for example, with Noel Ignatiev's work.  Perhaps
because of this newish focus, there a somewhat odd silence in the book.
Throughout Martinot's meticulous histories, almost on each page, we are
left wondering how African Americans conceptualized and internalized
their situation at each particular date and place.  As much as blacks
have been unwilling participants in the emerging system of race, and
their choices have been starkly shaped by an overwhelming violence,
their resistances, co-optation, and self-consciousness -must- have
played a role in what specifically evolved.  I wish the perspective of
African Americans were better integrated into Martinot's historical
narrative, in parallel with the changing consciousness and
self-conceptualization of whites.

I believe Martinot would offer a particular objection to my criticism,
however.  For him, "Simone de Beauvoir points out that marriage is a
relation between men for which women are the means; similarly, racism is
a relation between whites for which nonwhite people are the language.
(p.185)" In this sense racism is simply not a system in which non-whites
participate; still, histories emerge, at least in part, out of the
actions of individuals, and the -others- of white supremacy have always
acted also.

Moreover, I think that Martinot's theme of race emerging out of the
primary construction of -whiteness- mandates his focus on black and
white in the racial system of the United States.  It is certainly not
that Martinot forgets other non-whites--Native Americans, Latinos,
Chinese, and so on--but emerging out of the African/European/North
American slave trade, it was this particular reified juridico-legal
recognition of a chromatic difference that first constructed the meaning
of whiteness.  Native Americans in pre-Revolution colonies, even as much
as they might be murdered or land expropriated from them in accordance
with British law, were initially conceptualized as heathen and/or
lacking agency under that law; but not (yet) in racial terms.

A particular circular structure of presupposition occurs, according to
Martinot, throughout the history of racialization--and provides a key to
understanding its illusion.  A racial ideology discovers its antecedents
and necessity everywhere it looks, because its very process is the
construction of race under its gaze.  For example, in recent racial
profiling:

    Profiling is the inverse of law enforcement.  In law enforcement, a
    crime is discovered and the police then look for a suspect who might
    possibly have committed it.  Profiling means that a suspect is
    discovered and the police then look for a crime for the person to
    have possibly committed.  (p.168)

Likewise, in pre-Civil War "free states:"

    When newly arrived refugees from slavery sought to vote, they were
    denied on the basis that, as former or runaway slaves, they were
    unfit for the franchise.  If they did not seek the vote, in order to
    live unnoticed as far as possible, they were deemed unfit for not
    having participated in the democratic process.  (p.104).

This same pattern of ideological discovery is ubiquitous in white
supremacy.

After all Martinot's analysis, the fundamental mystery still remains:
how can race remain so persistent, even across changes to class systems
and the specific forms of racialization?  Its suppositional structure
goes a ways towards an answer, but it always feels like something is
missing in every explanation.  This is not remotely a flaw in Martinot's
book, but is the very kernel that he moves us slightly closer towards
being able to understand.

                            David Mertz


------------------------------------------------------------------------
P.S. I had the following in mind for my little lead-in:

    http://www-bcs.mit.edu/people/adelson/checkershadow_illusion.html

There are many other similar tricks, but this one particularly "bothers"
me.  If you have a graphics app, try trimming smaller and smaller pieces
of the whole image.  The illusion doesn't go away until you can see only
the interior of a single square (and get rid of the labels).

