REASONABLE MEN AND REASONABLE WOMEN
Comment to Usenet group soc.feminism

David Mertz
April, 1993

  The recent discussion in this group about the use of a
  university sexual-harrassment code to blackmail a lecturer
  about a grade has piqued my thought about a related legal
  issue.  In particular, the original poster stated something to
  the effect that the sexual-harrassment code of his school
  defined sexual-harrassment in wholly in terms of the perceived
  harrassment by the alleged "victim."  I don't know the exact
  wording at his school, nor do I remember off the top of my head
  what school he was at--but it's certainly true that there has
  been a significant move in sexual-harrassment codes in this
  general direction.

  The notion of defining sexual-harrassment, or other legally
  actionable situations, in terms of the perceptions of alleged
  victims arises out of some moves in "femininst" legal philosphy
  made by Catherine MacKinnon, and a few others; and these moves
  have directly and indirectly been very influential in a great
  deal of judicial thinking of the last decade.  Or, short of
  that, MacKinnon's legal philosophy has moved in parallel with
  some broader currents--most of which are clearly associated
  with a highly carceral tendency in society, and with right-wing
  opposition to civil and juridical rights of the accused.  It is
  thus that I put -feminist- above in double, "scare" quotes.  I
  believe this type of legal philosphy is deeply antithetical to
  the aims of feminism.

  What is the move made by MacKinnon, and others?  In part, it
  concerns a distinction made by MacKinnon between a "reasonable
  man" and a "reasonable woman".  The first--the "reasonable man"
  (or nowadays, more often simply "reasonable person")--is a
  legal fiction, or abstraction, expressing a kind of normative
  epistemic relation of a person to her actions.  That is, there
  are certain things that such an hypothetical "reasonable
  person" is expected to know about the legality of actions she
  might take.  It is no legal defense for an accused (or,
  similarly, for a litigant in a civil case) to claim--even
  truthfully and provably--that she *personally* did not know of
  the illegality of an action she took.  It is, however, a
  recognized legal defense to claim that a "reasonable person"
  acting as she did would not be aware of the illegality of an
  action.  That is, people are not legally responsible on the
  basis of their *actual* knowledge of law and empirical reality,
  but on the basis of a certain minimum normative standard of
  what every person is "commanded to know."  If an accused cannot
  be considered, by legal fiat, to have been commanded-to-know a
  given fact, she cannot be held culpable on the basis of the
  fact.  Inversely, if an accused is considered to have been
  "commanded-to-know"--regardless of her actual epistemic
  state--she is held culpable.  (Of course, there are always
  exceptions, such as the Bernard Getz case where is *actual*
  fear was held as grounds for a self-defense plea, despite no
  claim being proven that such a fear was *reasonable*--but
  that's simply *BAD LAW*).  This can be clarified with a brief
  example.  Suppose a driver is charged with violating a speed
  limit.  A defense claiming that she *did not* see the
  speed-limit sign has no legal weight--so long as she could
  "reasonably have been expected" to see the sign.  If however, a
  "reasonable person" would not have seen the sign--for example,
  because it had been knocked-down or obstructed by another
  sign--then the driver cannot (in principle) be convicted on the
  charge.  Of course, there are guidelines for what's reasonable
  to expect, even lacking a sign:  100mph in a 35mph zone is
  awfully likely not to satisfy a reasonable-person standard,
  sign or no-sign.

  MacKinnon argues against this standard of these last 300 years
  of the Anglo-American legal tradition.  She claims that the
  societal position of women and men are so fundamentally
  different that what may constitute *reasonable* action from the
  POV of a male assailant, may nontheless constitute a genuine
  crime from the POV of a *reasonable* female "victim."
  Furthermore, MacKinnon supposes, the "reasonable-person"
  standard of legal tradition is fundamentally a "reasonable-MAN"
  standard (as, indeed, it is sometimes explicitly called in some
  court opinions).  The kinds of examples MacKinnon provides are
  of crimes such as sexual-harrassment, rape, or exposure to
  pornography (constituting, roughly, one of the former two
  crimes).  In her example, a remark made by a male *boss* to a
  female employee may, by the "reasonable-man" standard, not be
  known to constitute an act of intimidation; and yet, a
  *reasonable-woman* might be intimidated by such a remark.
  Similarly, claims MacKinnon, such gaps may exist in rape cases
  between what a male "rapist" and a female "victim" may
  *reasonably* consider consent.  Needless to say, MacKinnon
  argues that the latter "reasonable" position ought to be the
  standard in establishing legal culpability.  And such a
  standard is essentially what's being implemented in many
  institutional sexual-harrassment guidelines--though only
  rarely, so far, in actual *laws*.

  The only problem with the above move is that it *COMPLETELY*
  abandons the protections of juridical due-process, presumption
  of innocence, and most other rights of the accused.  Although
  it's nearly preposterous to accuse MacKinnon of acting in
  *good-faith* (given her extensive legal knowledge); however,
  many persons--many *feminists*, even--upon first hearing her
  argument think it deserves serious consideration; and even feel
  a certain sympathy, given the prevalence of unactioned
  sexual-harrassment, rape, etc. which clearly occur.  After all,
  "why should insensitive male bosses continue to be allowed by
  courts to sexually-harrass their female employees?!"--one might
  ask with outrage.  If such men can simply claim to courts that
  they did not *know* women were offended by their actions, is
  not a different legal standard appropriate?  One which might
  hold such men more legally culpable?  In short, the answer must
  be -NO!- But fully to understand just why it's so very
  imperative that this answer be given, let me try to show some
  of what's elided and swept out of sight in MacKinnon's style of
  rhetoric.

  A distinction between *procedure* and *outcome* is central to
  American jurisprudence.  And it is in the former that all
  civil-rights protections lay.  One is not found "not guilty" of
  a crime because one is innocent, but because a prosecutor is
  unable legally to establish your guilt.  And one is not found
  "guilty" because one is--in some metaphysical sense--guilty,
  but because guilt may be *proven* beyond a reasonable doubt in
  a court of law.  If we are to live under a society of law, then
  rigorous *conformity* of procedure must always be held more
  important than *accuracy* of outcome--for otherwise, in the
  abandonment of procedural precedence punishment is accorded
  only through the political mandates of prosecutors, cops and
  judges, and society becomes a society of absolute tyranny:
  even if it becomes a tyranny of a momentary majority.  In the
  curtailing of individual rights, and of due process, the call
  is *always* made to produce more accurate *outcomes*--and
  relatedly, to bring about the greatest societal good through
  prosecution.  This is what's involved in the so- called
  "victims-rights" movement; this is what's involved in the
  Reinquist Court's 1986 (?) decision to allow illegally seized
  ("Tainted") evidence back into court; this is what's involved
  in every vigilante and Fascist political movement; and this is
  what's clearly involved in MacKinnon's legal philosophy.

  In specifically claiming a gap between the knowledge of a
  "reasonable male actor" and that of a "reasonable female
  victim", MacKinnon abandons the principle that legal
  actionability ought to follow from knowable decisions made by
  persons, and substitutes the principle of greater societal
  good--or, perhaps, greater good for a certain section of
  society (women).  These two standards need not always conflict;
  in fact, the need not conflict often, or even *ever*.  But
  insofar as a possibility of conflict between the standards
  exists--and insofar as it is specifically, and necessarily,
  postulated to occur by MacKinnon--there come into being a class
  of cases where conviction of a crime becomes proper for a class
  of people who could not have *reasonably* known they were
  committing any crime.  Whether this class of people would be
  tiny or huge is not knowable in advance of its concrete
  adoption into the law (which has, thankfully, not occurred
  significantly as yet)--but the one thing of which we could be
  certain is that a change in legal procedure and principle so
  sweeping as MacKinnon suggests would not remain confined to
  those gender- specific cases she duplicitously gives as sole
  examples.  Her principle allowing for legal culpability in the
  absence of *knowable* culpability is precisely the sort of
  totalitarian principle which inevitably and always grows in a
  self-perpetuating vicious circle.  It also seems exceedingly
  unlikely that a principle such as hers would be applied
  primarily, nor even often, in the sexual-harrassment type cases
  she discusses.  Instead we would see increasingly many blacks
  arrested or killed for appearing "threatening" according to a
  principle *reasonable* only to the white racists viewing them
  (as in the Getz case); and increasingly many working-class
  suspects "justifiably" arrested on the sole grounds that a
  judgement of their criminal nature is *reasonable* from the
  cops' POV.

  Furthermore, the shift in standard MacKinnon argues, using the
  example of sexual-harrassment cases, is wholly unnecessary even
  (or especially) in those very cases she argues for.  What is
  required is NOT a shift in the perspective from which an action
  is judged unreasonable, but simply a change in the standards to
  which a (male) person increasingly many should be *reasonably*
  held.  We need not perform the metaphysical contortions of
  MacKinnon construing a crime committed by an unknowing male
  boss when we may simply argue that such a man might
  *reasonably* have been expected to know more than he
  empirically did.  Culpability should well be assigned to those
  clinging to a *deliberate* ignorance, but it *must not* be
  assigned to those whose ignorance is purely
  metaphysical--determined lifelong, and in advance, by their
  gender.

  Yours, Lulu...

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Followup
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Alden Gannon wrote in response to the above -"Reasonable Men" and
  "Reasonable Women"- essay:

    MacKinnon does not venture to argue that defendants should no longer
    be accorded the right to due process. Rather, she proposes a
    different *standard* to which all defendants should be measured. Her
    system is still procedural. You can just as well *conform* to the
    standard of reasonable victim as to reasonable perpetrator. The
    question *is* one of accuracy.

  I think you may not have this quite right. If one is a "victim," there
  is no requirement -- nor even sense -- in legal *conformity* or
  *non-conformity*. It's the *accused* who are judged to conform or not
  with the legal requirements upon them. That's the point of all
  criminal procedures -- and many civil, as well. However, I may indeed
  have been wrong in claiming MacK's proposed legal measures are not
  still "procedural"... it might be argued that a specified requirement
  for judging social good is still "procedural" insofar as it is based
  on normative judicial fictions and rules. I think due-process is lost,
  even accepting this argument momentarily, since guilt or innocence is
  no longer a question of knowable actions taken by a defendent; but it
  might be *substantative* more than *procedural* due-process which is
  abandoned. At any rate, I cannot dismiss such a suggestion without
  more argument than I have thus far provided. So my debt (and
  acknowledgement, if you want) is to you for raising this.

    Yes, as I understand it, this is exactly the impetus for MacKinnon's
    position. Furthermore, MacKinnon's fictitious "reasonable woman" is
    defined by a set of criteria to which the defendent is compared.
    Should the legal system conclude that the male actor transgressed
    against the "reasonable woman," the view of the actual "victim" is
    not judicially relevant. Thus, it is possible for a male actor to
    commit a crime of which he was not aware against a victim who was
    not aware of the crime, either, or even suffered from it in any way.
    The male actor was guilty of transgressing against the fictitious
    "reasonable woman," and hence society at large. This further
    radicalizes MacKinnnon's view.

  This is a very nice formulation.  I wish I would have observed the
  proposed change in this same example in my post.

    I argue that MacKinnon's proposed shift in standards (to "reasonable
    victim") and your suggested modification to the "reasonable actor"
    standard are equivalent in result, and both fraught with the same
    opportunities for inaccuracy. MacKinnon's fictitious "reasonable
    woman" is defined by a set of criteria to which the defendent is
    compared. To achieve MacKinnon's desired result (that sexual
    harassers be brought to justice), you suggest, if I understand you
    correctly, applying the same criteria to the "reasonable person"
    standard, and then arguing legal fiat to assign the epistimological
    state of the perpetrator. You claim that MacKinnon's standard could
    create a class of people who cannot be expected to be aware of
    committing the crime with which they are charged. You suggest taking
    this same set of people and simply using legal fiat to assign to
    them criminal intent. The net result is the same.

  I'm afraid you're wrong in this part. I do not propose any procedural
  change, so regardless of the effect in concrete cases, my suggestion
  does not abandon due-process protections. The kind of change I
  suggest, in fact, is quite banal and ordinary, and is already going
  on. Legal fiat exist in *all* traditional jurisprudence, so I do not
  add anything in this regard. Just consider the example I mentioned
  about speed-limits. One is *presumed* to have seen properly posted
  signs by legal-fiat, regardless of whether one *actually* did see
  them. Normative epistemological state is always created by legal-
  fiat; that's why "ignorance of the law is no excuse." I suggested
  that, perhaps, in previous sexual-harrassment cases, an insufficient
  normative epistemological state is presumed -- but such is the stuff
  of ordinary legal argument. One might have an exactly analogous
  argument in regard to the frequency with which speed-limit signs need
  be posted in order that a "reasonable person" can be expected to see
  them. Perhaps a previous case found once a mile sufficient, while I
  might argue that every half-mile *should* be required (or, were I a
  prosecutor, perhaps that every two-miles is often enough :-)). There's
  ALWAYS some particular epistemic state demanded under the law, but
  arguing the details of this state does not *necessarily* touch on any
  due-process issues (of course, it *might* -- if the standard is unduly
  burdensome for some class of people). What MacK does is entirely
  different from this: she argues that there ought to be a class of
  cases where the epistemic state of an accused might be *reasonable*,
  and yet *irrelevant* to guilt!!