CHARMING PYTHON #B3:
Book Roundup, Part 2

David Mertz, Ph.D.
Color Commentator, Gnosis Software, Inc.
November, 2001

    Since my last book roundup in Charming Python #12, a number
    of interesting books on Python have been published.  This
    installments provides new comparative reviews of recent
    Python titles (or titles missed in the last roundup).


WHAT IS PYTHON?
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Python is a freely available, very-high-level, interpreted
  language developed by Guido van Rossum.  It combines a clear
  syntax with powerful (but optional) object-oriented semantics.
  Python is available for almost every computer platform you
  might find yourself working on, and has strong portability
  between platforms.


PRE-GAME
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  This installment is intended to round out the book roundup I
  wrote for this column at the beginning of this year.  Since
  then, some new books have been published, and some other books
  have made it to my desk that I had not yet had a chance to look
  at 11 months ago.  There are still a few ommissions of books I
  have not quite got my hands on, but between the two
  installments, almost every book you might consider buying on
  Python today is discussed.

  By the time next year rolls around, even more books will join
  the Python bookshelf.  Surely there will be new titles I have
  not heard of; but some I know about look promising.

  Python stalwart and brilliant Usenet essayist Alex Martelli has
  apparently contracted to write two separate books for
  O'Reilly--one titled, _Python in a Nutshell_ (which one waits
  with anticipation if only to see Martelli's prolific writing
  inclinations squeezed into a compact size).  Bruce Eckel, whose
  _Thinking in Java_ has been very well received, has had
  not-yet-realized plans to write a _Thinking in Python_ for a
  while; perhaps he will for 2002.  Christopher Jones and Fred
  Drake have another O'Reilly title _Python & XML_ underway,
  which looks promising.  And, of course, I cannot let this
  column go by without mentioning that your humble author is in
  the process of writing the title _Text Processing in Python_
  for Addison-Wesley.  2002 looks to be another good year for
  Python.

  The few currently in print Python books that I have not had the
  chance to look at should be mentioned briefly.  No slight is
  intended towards these titles, but neither can I make any
  particular recommendation.  These are:

    * _Core Python Programming_, Wesley J. Chun, Prentice Hall
      (December 2000).

    * _Sams Teach Yourself Python in 24 Hours_, Ivan Van
      Laningham, Sams (May 2000).

    * _Python: Developer's Handbook_, Andre dos Santos Lessa,
      Sams (December 2000).

  If I have missed anything altogether, I apologize to the
  appropriate publishers and authors.  Let me know; I'll try to
  work something in at some future point.

  While books are a wonderful way to get started with most topics
  (including Python), there is also very good documentation that
  accompanies Python itself.  Take a look at:
  http://python.org/doc/ to get yourself started.  The Python
  team have written a quite excellent introductory tutorial, and
  the quality of the the module index, library reference,
  language reference are much better than most programming
  languages, or free software in general, has (but the
  distinction between the latter two items is always fuzzy to me
  when I go to look something up... try both if in doubt).


TOUCHING SOME OLD BASES
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Six months ago, the one Python book I made sure to keep within
  arm's reach while programming was David Beazley's _Python
  Essential Reference_.  Mind you, the rest are all within a few
  steps of my chair, but Beazley's is the one I didn't have to
  stand up for.  That's changed a bit in the last few months--now
  the book in arm's reach is the *second edition* of _Python
  Essential Reference_.  The main change between editions is
  simply an update to coverage from Python 1.5.2 to Python 2.1.
  The organization and most of the content remain the same.
  Apparently in response to some user complaints, the font size
  was increased slightly (and the length went from 318 to 396
  pages); unfortunately, at the same time the 2nd edition is
  printed on paper with a much lower brightness--readability
  (from a purely physical perspective) has actually gotten
  slightly worse.

  Another title that was mentioned but not reviewed in the
  previous installment is Fredrik Lundh's _Python Standard
  Library_.  At that time, only an encumbered electronic version
  was available, but since then O'Reilly has published a printed
  version.  _Python Standard Library_ is a thin volume--281 pages
  in physical size, but more lines of the books are taken up with
  source code and vertical whitespace than with prose
  description.  The total words do not add up to a large number.

  _Python Standard Library_ has a fairly narrow target, but
  succeed well in fulfilling its goal.  The target is experienced
  Python programmers who also have either the standard module
  documentation and/or one of the thicker books at hand.  Almost
  all of the modules in Python 2.0's standard library are
  covered, but the coverage is not aimed at documenting every
  constant, function and class inside each module.  Instead, each
  module is introduced with extremely clear and articulate prose
  descriptions, followed by well chosen -typical- usage examples.

  Many of the other books I have looked at also use extensive
  source code examples; but in many of those, one has to re-read
  and ponder for a while to figure out exactly what an example is
  meant to illustrate, which part of it illustrates the topic at
  hand, and why it is an illustration.  In contrast, the source
  code examples in _Python Standard Library_ are only as long as
  necessary, are clear, have adequate inline documentation, and
  get right to the point being illustrated.  Likewise, the prose
  introductions provide exactly the sort of clear guidance one
  might ask of the more experienced programmer in the cubicle
  next to yours (if you are lucky enough to have such a
  co-worker).  The descriptions, however, by intention do not try
  to teach you basic concepts--they assume you basically know
  what you are doing, and just need to refine or direct how you
  do it.


WARMING UP
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  _Learn to Program Using Python:  Learn to Program Using Python:
  A Tutorial for Hobbyists, Self-Starters, and Those Who Want to
  Learn the Art of Programming_ is probably *not* a book for
  most readers of this column.  As the title promises, Alan
  Gauld's title is for non-programmers who want to become
  programmers, or at least to understand what it is programmers
  do.  For the people the book is for, Gauld has written a
  delightful book.

  I tried to recruit one non-programmer "informant" (as one says
  in anthropology) to give an opinion on _Learn to Program Using
  Python_.  My recruitment was only a mixed success, but not
  because of any failing of the book, merely my choice of
  informant.  Nonetheless, the testimony I got regarding the
  first few chapters was very positive--the basic concepts of
  flow control, branching, variables, and the like seemed pitched
  right for my semi-voluntary beginner.

  Gauld walks through a reasonable range of topics, and keeps
  them in a good pedagogical sequence.  The reader of this book
  should read the book from one cover to the other.  There -is- a
  good index, but jumping around is not what this type of book is
  for.  The source code examples do an excellent job of
  progressively presenting new concepts while remaning clear and
  to the point.  Even though many books' use of sidebars and
  boxes is just busy and distracting, Gauld strikes a good
  balance with his "Things to Ponder" and "Points to Remember"
  that appear at the end of each chapter.  Overall, this looks
  like a just plain -fun- book to read.


STUDYING THE PLAYBOOK
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  There is a certain style of programming book that I have
  trouble seeing the point of.  Sample source code is important
  to learning a programming language or technique; but a certain
  type of book consists primarily of source, with the prose
  existing mostly to explain the source code in a line-by-line
  way.  It is not merely the quantity of source code that I find
  ineffective.  _Python Standard Library_ has a high proportion
  of source code--but the source code exists as a continuation
  and elaboration of the prose; the source code -explains- rather
  than merely -being explained-.  In another style of book, the
  source code just lays there as a dead mass, with the prose
  vainly trying to vivify it.

  Two of the books in the current roundup are in the described
  source-code-with-commentary.  One is _Python Annotated
  Archives_.  This is one of those heavy tomes that its
  publisher, Osborne, is fond of (720 pages).  I cannot really
  recommend this book to much anyone.  Experienced programmers
  will not be able to find reference information easily, and
  beginners will lack the background to jump into any particular
  script.  Moreover, it almost seems to be -cheating- to publish
  a book that just reproduces (albeit also discusses) all the
  scripts in the 'Demo/' directory of every Python distribution
  (copyrights are in order, I mean it in a "scruples" way).  What
  are we really getting by buying this book?

  A lot of concepts inevitably occur in 700+ pages.  But there is
  no particular order apparent to where they occur.  Here is one
  arbitrary example: the use of '__doc__' strings is a fairly
  important convention in Python programming.  A beginner would
  not know about it from this book unless she happened to turn to
  page 162 to find an explanation of them--not because that page
  is where documentation conventions are discussed, but just
  because the script being discussed happens to have some
  '__doc__' strings.  A handful of other pages scattered through
  the book also mention, "by the way, this is a __doc__ string."
  An experienced programmer is unlikely to need the explanation,
  a beginner is unlikely to find it.

  Moreover, the explanatory prose is haphazard (and not
  infrequently wrong or incoherent--e.g. I cannot make heads or
  tails of the lead-in to the very first example 'prime.py').
  Martin Brown just sort of throws whatever explanation comes to
  mind at each block of three or four lines of each script (which
  are redundantly printed, then printed again with annotation).
  But if someone doesn't understand what a loop or an numeric
  operation does, the place to explain it isn't next to each
  loop, but in an "about loops" or "about operations" section of
  a book.

  _Programming with Python_ suffers a similar weakness to _Python
  Annotated Archives_.  This title advertises on its cover
  "filled with over 40 full-length, annotated scripts."  It lives
  up to its promise; but the Vaults of Parnassus have many more
  than 40 full-length scripts, covering a far wider range of
  purposes.  If you need a Python script to accomplish some
  particular moderately complex purpose, you are a lot better off
  finding one to download from a Python internet archive, like
  Parnassus (and a few dollars the richer for not buying a book).

  There is a little bit of other stuff in _Programming with
  Python_ than the scripts themselves.  The scripts have a little
  bit of explanation--but only a little bit.  The beginning bit
  of the book has brief summary of the statements (with built-in
  functions mistakenly called statements), modules, and some
  Python syntax.  But the Python tutorial is better.  The last
  few pages of the book have a pretty good set of FAQ-type
  questions about Python.  I haven't seen anything exactly like
  that on the web, and the questions presented are good ones,
  with accurate answers.  But that is only 57 pages worth of
  material, and your particular questions will only be a few of
  those listed.


THE COMPLETE STAT SHEETS
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  A popular type of computer programming book is the thick tome
  dedicated to being a complete reference for a language or tool.
  I've had a chance to look at three such books.

  A first option for the "about everything" Python reference is
  the second edition of _Programming Python_.  I have already
  written about the first edition, and most of what I wrote there
  is still true.  _Programming Python_ has grown to an even
  larger 1255 pages, and now covers Python 2.0.  A lot of new
  material is in it, but the same strategy of building up
  examples is used.  Mark Lutz' writing continues to be clear and
  informative, and his examples well written.  _Programming
  Python_ is more of a very thorough -course- in Python than it
  is a reference one returns to.  There is an adequate index, and
  it is not unduly difficult to find things.  But the main point
  is to walk the reader through aspects of programming in Python.

  The second option for a complete reference to Python is called,
  straightforwardly enough, _Python:  The Complete Reference_, by
  Martin Brown.  As in _Python Annotated Archives_, Brown has a
  habit of interspersing short snippets of source code with prose
  describing the code (this time with a distracting dark gray bar
  to the left of the code).  I still do not really like that
  style, but most of the sins of the other book are absent from
  this one.  _The Complete Reference_ covers pretty much the same
  ground as _Programming Python_, both are more about learning
  Python (as a programmer experienced in other languages) than
  they are about acting as a reference.  But _The Complete
  Reference_ has its material divided into 27 well chosen
  chapters, with both a detailed TOC and a good index.  You may
  not be able to turn to the exact page that answers your
  question (as you can in _Python Essential Reference_, but at
  least you can easily find the right chapter to read.  At a bit
  under 700 pages, reading 1/27th of the book to brush up on a
  topic is a reasonable task.  The prose is also better organized
  and better written than Brown's other title.

  In the "complete reference" category, I like the _Python 2.1
  Bible_ the best.  If nothing else, it is more up-to-date in
  terms of Python version than the other options.  But even
  beyond that, it is a nicer book for the particular slant.  In
  the Hungry Minds tradition, the book is a bit too "loud"
  typographically--I can hardly focus on the cover without
  getting dizzy, and the text is littered with a few too many
  icons, tables, dingbats and the like.  That said, I find the
  bright sans-serif header font and vertical white spacing to be
  very attractive; and the clean gothic fixed font makes for much
  more easily scanned source code samples than does the courier
  most books use.  And even the judicious use of 10% screens
  draws the eye helpfully.

  Aside from the (important) physical apprearance of _Python 2.1
  Bible_, the organization is the most useful for programmers
  with a bit of experience (the first few chapters develop the
  necessary basic concepts pretty well).  The book is broken into
  more chapters (38), and the chapters better focussed on the
  most important Python concepts than are the other "big" books.
  Moreover, the TOC and index are both of extremely good detail
  and quality.  Brueck and Tanner's prose is furthermore the best
  in this category of books--factual, accurate and to the point
  (Lutz, and especially Brown, tend a bit towards "chatty").


RESOURCES
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  _Python & XML_, Christopher A. Jones & Fred L. Drake, Jr.,
  O'Reilly 2001 (est). ISBN: 0-596-00128-2

  Bruce Eckel's "Thinking in Python" website:
    http://www.mindview.net/Books/Python/ThinkingInPython.html

  _Python Essential Reference, Second Edition_, David M. Beazley,
  New Riders 2001. ISBN: 0-7357-1091-0.

  _Python Standard Library_, Fredrik Lundh, O'Reilly 2001.  ISBN:
  0-596-00096-0.

  _Learn to Program Using Python:  A Tutorial for Hobbyists,
  Self-Starters, and Those Who Want to Learn the Art of
  Programming_, Alan Gauld, Addison-Wesley 2001.  ISBN:
  0-2017-0938-4

  _Python :  Annotated Archives_, Martin C. Brown, Osborne/
  McGraw-Hill 2000.  ISBN: 0-07-212104-1.

  _Programming With Python_, Tim Altom, Premier Press 1999.
  ISBN: 0-7615-2334-0

  _Programming Python, Second Edition_, Mark Lutz, O'Reilly 2001.
  ISBN: 0-596-00085-5.

  _Python: The Complete Reference_, Martin C. Brown, Osborne/
  McGraw-Hill 2001. ISBN: 0-07-212718-X.

  _Python 2.1 Bible_, David Brueck, Stephen Tanner, Hungry Minds
  2001. ISBN: 0-7645-4807-7.


ABOUT THE AUTHOR
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  {Picture of Author: http://gnosis.cx/cgi-bin/img_dqm.cgi}
  David Mertz' failures as a hunter, fisherman, and shepherd have
  led him to his life of critical criticism.  Tomorrow he may try
  something else.  David may be reached at mertz@gnosis.cx; his
  life pored over at http://gnosis.cx/publish/.  Suggestions and
  recommendations on this, past, or future, columns are welcomed.

