CHARMING PYTHON #B7:
Implementing "weightless threads" with Python generators.

David Mertz, Ph.D.
Producer, Gnosis Software, Inc.
February, 2002

    A prior installment introduced a way of simulating
    full-fledged coroutines with generators and a simple
    scheduler.  It is possible to extend this scheduler in
    straightforward ways to allow extremely lightweight threading
    of multiple processes.  Much as with Stackless Python
    microthreads, psuedo-coroutine "weightless threads" require
    almost none of the context switch and memory overhead of
    OS--or even userland--threads.  But problems that naturally
    present themselves as large numbers of cooperating processes,
    weightless threads are an elegant solution.


INTRODUCTION
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  The area of microthreads--at least in Python--has been an
  exotic enhancement reserved for Stackless Python.  The topic of
  Stackless, and the changes it has been undergoing recently,
  probably merit a whole column by itself.  But the very short
  story is that under the "new Stackless" continuations are
  apparently out-the-window, but microthreads remain the
  -raison d'etre- of the project.  It's complicated.

  Let us back up a bit though.  Just what is a microthread?
  Basically, a microthread is a process that can run with
  miniscule inherent resource requirements--and that run within a
  single instance of the Python interpreter (in a common memory
  space, and so on).  With microthreads, it is possible to run
  tens of thousands of parallel processes on a moderately capable
  modern PC, and to switch between contexts hundreds of thousands
  of times every second.  Calls to 'fork()' or standard OS
  threading calls do not even come close to this! Even so-called
  "lightweight" threading libraries have threads that are orders
  of magnitude "heavier" than those presented here.

  The semantics of the weightless threads I introduce in this
  column are a bit different from that of OS threads.  For that
  matter, they are also not quite the same as what Stackless
  provides.  In most respects weightless threads are quite a bit
  simpler than most variants--most issues about semaphors,
  locking, and the like disappear.  The price of the simplicity
  is that I present a form of "cooperative multithreading;"
  adding preemption within the framework of standard Python does
  not appear feasible to me (at least with non-Stackless Python
  2.2--no one knows what the '__future__' might bring).

  In a way, weightless threads recall the cooperative
  multitasking of older Windows and MacOS versions (but within a
  single application).  In another sense, however, weightless
  threads are merely another way of expressing flow in a
  program--nothing that weightless threads do could not, in
  principle, be accomplished with the "really big if/elif block"
  technique (the last resort of the brute force programmer).


RECOLLECTING COROUTINES
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  An earlier installment of this column presented a mechanism for
  simulating coroutines with simple generators.  At its core, the
  mechanism is amazingly simple.  A set of generator objects is
  wrapped in a 'scheduler()' function that controls delegation of
  control flow to an appropriate branch.  These are not -true-
  coroutines in the sense that control only branches to and from
  the 'scheduler()' function, but for practical purposes, one
  accomplishes the same thing with very little extra code.  This
  is what 'scheduler()' looked like:

      #---------- Scheduler() for simulated coroutines --------#
      def scheduler(gendct, start):
          global cargo
          coroutine = start
          while 1:
              (coroutine, cargo) = gendct[coroutine].next()

  The thing to notice about this wrapper is that each
  generator/coroutine yield's a tuple that contains its intended
  branch destination.  Basically, a generator/coroutine exits
  with a GOTO target.  For convenience, I also let the generators
  yield a standard 'cargo' container as a way of formalizing the
  data that is passed between coroutines--but one could also
  simply use agreed-upon global variables or callback
  setter/getter functions to pass data.  Raymond Hettinger has
  written a Python Enhancement Proposal (PEP) that is intended to
  allow better encapsulation of passed data; perhaps future
  Pythons will include it.


NEW SCHEDULERS
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  For weightless threads, the requirements are slightly different
  from those in coroutines.  But we can still use a 'scheduler()'
  function at its heart.  The difference is that the scheduler
  itself should decide branch targets rather than receive them
  from the generator/coroutines.  Let me present a complete test
  program and sample:

      #------------ 'microthreads.py' example script ----------#
      from __future__ import generators
      import sys, time

      threads = []
      TOTALSWITCHES = 10**6
      NUMTHREADS    = 10**5

      def null_factory():
          def empty():
              while 1: yield None
          return empty()

      def quitter():
          for n in xrange(TOTALSWITCHES/NUMTHREADS):
              yield None

      def scheduler():
          global threads
          try:
              while 1:
                  for thread in threads: thread.next()
          except StopIteration:
              pass

      if __name__ == "__main__":
          for i in range(NUMTHREADS):
              threads.append(null_factory())
          threads.append(quitter())
          starttime = time.clock()
          scheduler()
          print "TOTAL TIME:    ", time.clock()-starttime
          print "TOTAL SWITCHES:", TOTALSWITCHES
          print "TOTAL THREADS: ", NUMTHREADS

  This is about the simplest weightless thread scheduler one
  could choose Every thread is entered in fixed order, and each
  has an identical priority.  Below I take a look at how to
  complicate these details.  As with the prior installment's
  coroutines, weightless threads should be written to obey a few
  conventions.

  Most of the time, a weightless thread's generator should be
  bracketted in a 'while 1:' loop.  The way the scheduler is
  setup here causes the whole scheduler to stop when one thread
  does so.  This is less "robust" in a sense than OS threads--but
  it would not be much extra machinery to catch exceptions
  -inside- 'scheduler()'s loop rather than outside the loop.
  Moreover, a thread can be removed from the 'threads' list
  without reaching a termination (either by itself, or by some
  other thread).  We haven't really provided the bookkeeping to
  make removal easy; but a natural extension would be to store
  threads in a dictionary or some other structure, instead of a
  list.

  The example illustrates one reasonable technique for eventual
  termination of the scheduler loop.  A special generator/thread
  'quitter()' monitors some condition--in this case just a count
  of context switches--and throws a 'StopIteration' when it is
  satisfied (other exceptions are not caught in the example).
  Notice that after termination, all the other generators are
  still intact, and can be resumed later, if desired (either in a
  microthread scheduler or otherwise).  Obviously, you could
  'delete' these generator/threads if desired.

  The particular example uses particularly pointless threads.
  They do nothing, and do so in the absolute minimal possible
  form.  The example is set up this way to illustrate a
  point--the inherent overhead of weightless threads is quite
  low.  Creating 100,000 weightless threads is no problem on an
  older Windows98 Pentium II laptop with only 64 meg of memory (at one
  million threads, long disk churning occurs).  Try that with OS
  threads!  Moreover, on this fairly slow 366Mhz chip, one million
  context switches can be performed in about 10 seconds (the
  number of threads involved is not particularly significant to
  the timing).  Obviously, realistic weightless threads should
  -do- something, and this will use some greater resources
  proportionate to the task.  But the threading itself earns the
  "weightless" name.


SWITHCHING OVERHEAD
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Switching between weightless threads is cheap, but it is still
  not quite free.  To test the case, I constructed an example
  that performs -some- work, but about the least one might
  reasonably perform in a thread.  Since the thread scheduler
  -really- amounts to instructions to "do A, then do B, then do
  C, etc." it was not difficult to create an entirely parallel
  case in a main function:

       #-------------- 'overhead.py' example script -----------#
       from __future__ import generators
       import time

       TIMES = 100000

       def stringops():
           for n in xrange(TIMES):
               s = "Mary had a little lamb"
               s = s.upper()
               s = "Mary had a little lamb"
               s = s.lower()
               s = "Mary had a little lamb"
               s = s.replace('a','A')

       def scheduler():
           for n in xrange(TIMES):
               for thread in threads: thread.next()

       def upper():
           while 1:
               s = "Mary had a little lamb"
               s = s.upper()
               yield None

       def lower():
           while 1:
               s = "Mary had a little lamb"
               s = s.lower()
               yield None

       def replace():
           while 1:
               s = "Mary had a little lamb"
               s = s.replace('a','A')
               yield None

       if __name__=='__main__':
           start = time.clock()
           stringops()
           looptime = time.clock()-start
           print "LOOP TIME:", looptime

           global threads
           threads.append(upper())
           threads.append(lower())
           threads.append(replace())
           start = time.clock()
           scheduler()
           threadtime = time.clock()-start
           print "THREAD TIME:", threadtime

  It turns out that the weightless thread version runs in
  slightly more than twice as long as the straight loop
  version--a little less than 3 seconds versus just over 6 on the
  mentioned machine.  Obviously, if each unit of work was two, or
  ten, or one hundred times as large as a single string method
  call then the proportion of time spent in thread overhead would
  be correspondingly small.


DESIGNING THREADS
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Weightless threads can--and usually should--be larger scale
  than a single conceptual operation.  A thread, of whatever
  sort, is used to represent the amount of flow context necesary
  to describe one particular -task- or -activity-.  But a task
  can be larger than the time/size one would want to spend inside
  a single thread context.  Preemption hadles this issue
  automatically, without any specific intervention by an
  appliation developer.  Unfortunately, weightless thread users
  need to pay some more attention to "playing nice" with other
  threads.

  At a minimum, a weightless thread should be considerate enough
  to 'yield' whenever it completes a conceptual operation.  The
  scheduler will come back to it for the next step.  For example:

      #------- Pseudo-Code Friendly Weightless Thread ---------#
      def nicethread():
          while 1:
              ...operation A...
              yield None
              ...operation B...
              yield None
              ...operation C...
              yield None

  A lot of times, a good design will 'yield' more often even than
  at the boundaries between basic operations.  Often something
  conceptually "basic" nonetheless involves looping over a large
  collection; when that is the case (depending on just how time
  consuming the loop body is), it probably makes sense to put a
  'yield' or two in the loop body (perhaps recurrent after a
  certain number of loop iterations).  Unlike with preemptive
  threads, an ill-behaved weightless thread can grab an
  indefinite amount of exclusive processor attention.


THE REST OF THE SCHEDULE
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  The examples have presented only the most basic styles of
  thread schedulers.  There is a lot more that one can
  potentially do (this issue is fairly independent of designing a
  good generator/thread).  Let me present several likely
  enhancements in passing.

  *Better thread management*: A simple 'threads' list makes it
  easy to add generator/threads for the scheduluer to handle.
  But this data structure does nothing to make it easy to remove
  or suspend threads that are no longer relevant.  A dictionary
  or a class is likely to be a better data structure for thread
  management.  As a quick example, below is a class that can
  (almost) drop in for the 'threads' list in the examples:

      class ThreadPool:
          """Enhanced threads list as class

          threads = ThreadPool()
          threads.append(threadfunc)  # not generator object
          if threads.query(num) <<has some property>>:
              threads.remove(num)
          """
          def __init__(self):
              self.threadlist = []
              self.threaddict = {}
              self.avail = 1
          def __getitem__(self, n):
              return self.threadlist[n]
          def append(self, threadfunc, docstring=None):
              # Argument is the generator func, not the gen object
              # Every threadfunc should contain a docstring
              docstring = docstring or threadfunc.__doc__
              self.threaddict[self.avail] = (docstring, threadfunc())
              self.avail += 1
              self.threadlist = [p[1] for p in self.threaddict.values()]
              return self.avail-1       # return the threadID
          def remove(self, threadID):
              del self.threaddict[threadID]
              self.threadlist = [p[1] for p in self.threaddict.values()]
          def query(self, threadID):
              "Information on thread, if it exists (otherwise None)
              return self.threaddict.get(threadID,[None])[0]

  One could do more, but this is a good start.

  *Thread priorities*: In the simple examples, all threads get
  equal attention from the scheduler.  There are at least two
  general approaches to a more fine-tuned thread priority system.
  One priority system could simply devote more attention to "high
  priority" threads than to low priority ones.  One
  straightforward way to do this would to create a new class
  'PriorityThreadPool(ThreadPool)' that returned more important
  threads more often during the thread iteration.  The simplest
  such approach might return some threads multiple successive
  times in its '.__getitem__()' method.  A high priority thread
  could then receive two, or ten, or a hundred successive
  "time-slices" rather than just one this way.  A (very weak)
  "real-time" variant on this might go as far as returning the
  multiple copies of important threads scattered throughout the
  thread list.  This would increase the actual frequency of
  servicing high-priority threads, not only the total attention
  they receive.

  A perhaps more sophisticated approach to thread priorities is
  not easily available in pure Python (but it is with some
  third-party OS/processor-specific libraries).  Rather than
  simply give high-priority threads an integer number of
  time-slices, the scheduler could measure the time actually
  spent in each weightless thread, and dynamically adjust the
  thread scheduling to be more "fair" to under-serviced threads
  (fairness perhaps related to thread priority).  Unfortunately,
  Python's 'time.clock()' and its family are not nearly high
  enough resolution timers to make this approach effective.  On
  the other hand, there is nothing that prevents an underfed
  thread in the "multiple-time-slices" approach from boosting its
  own priority dynamically.

  *Combining microthreads with coroutines*:  In order to create a
  scheduler for weightless threads (microthreads), I removed the
  coroutine logic for "please branch to here." Doing that was not
  actually necessary.  The weightless threads in the examples
  have always yielded 'None' rather than a jump target.  But
  there is no reason the two concepts could not be combined:  If
  a coroutine/thread yields a jump target, the scheduler can jump
  where requested (unless overridden by thread priorities,
  perhaps).  However, if a coroutine/thread merely yields 'None',
  the scheduler could make its own decision about the appropriate
  thread for the next attention.  There would be a bit of work
  involved in deciding (and programming) exactly how an arbitrary
  jump would interact with a linear thread que; but nothing
  particularly mysterious about the work.


CONCLUSION
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  The microthread pattern (or "weightless threads") basically
  boils down to yet another exotic style for flow control in
  Python.  Earlier installments have already touched on several
  others.  The beauty of having a good variety of control
  mechanisms is that it lets a developer isolate code
  functionality into its logical components and maximize
  contextual relevance of code.

  It doesn't take much, actually, to enable the -possibility- of
  doing everything possible (a "loop" and an "if").  For a class
  of problems easily broken into many small "agents", "servers",
  or "processes" weightless threads may be the clearest model for
  expressing the underlying "business logic" of an application.
  Of course, it does not hurt matters that weightless threads
  have the potential to be -blazingly fast- in comparison to more
  well-known flow mechanisms.


RESOURCES
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Early on in this column, I presented an abstract pattern for a
  broad class of state machines in Python.  The installment is
  the touchstone from which I explicate the new concepts herein:

    http://www-106.ibm.com/developerworks/library/python-state.html

  My interview with Stackless Python creator Christian Tismer
  touched on microthreads briefly, along with other exotic flow
  structures like continuations, coroutines and generators. The
  installment hints at some of the issues, before Python 2.2
  introduced generators:

    http://www-106.ibm.com/developerworks/library/l-pyth7.html

  Of most recent and closest connection is my effort to introduce
  iterators and simple generators during Python 2.2's alpha
  period:

    http://www-106.ibm.com/developerworks/library/l-pycon.html

  Good reading for anyone interested in microthreads is the
  Stackless Python website.  Even though my suggestions encroach
  on the Stackless conceptual space, Stackless continues to do a
  lot my framework doesn't (at the price of requiring a patched
  fork of the standard Python).

    http://www.stackless.org


ABOUT THE AUTHOR
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  {Picture of Author:  http://gnosis.cx/cgi-bin/img_dqm.cgi}
  David Mertz would like to write, with Nietzsche, that these are
  the musings of an old philologist, but that untruth would
  unmask itself.  But perhaps his (right here gratuitously
  plugged) forthcoming book, _Text Processing in Python_, will
  someday be mistaken for a cybernetic variant of philology.
  David may be reached at mertz@gnosis.cx; his life pored over at
  http://gnosis.cx/publish/.  Suggestions and recommendations on
  this, past, or future, columns are welcomed.

