CHARMING PYTHON #B8:
Book Roundup, Part 3

David Mertz, Ph.D.
Au courantist, Gnosis Software, Inc.
November, 2001

    Since my last book roundup in November's Charming Python a
    number of interesting books on Python have been published.
    This installments provides new comparative reviews of recent
    Python titles (or titles missed in the last roundup).


INTRODUCTION
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Python books have moved steadily to occupy larger shares of
  bookstore shelf space.  Since I started these roundups, the
  number of dead-tree titles has probably doubled twice.  And
  this says nothing of the many excellent electronic documents
  about Python out there on the web (including some full-length
  books).  This article touches on a handful of Python books that
  have made it to my bookshelf in the last months.


INTERNET RELATED
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Python and the Web

  Two of the titles I have recently received cover almost the
  same range of material:  Holden and Beazley's _Python Web
  Programming_ and Thiruvathukal, Christopher and Shafaee's _Web
  Programming in Python_.  Both reflect well on the excellent
  reputations of their respective publishers, New Riders and
  Prentice Hall.  It is hard to recommend one of these over the
  other, but let me point to a few difference.

  _Python Web Programming_ has quite good introduction to XML
  programming in Python.  Not as extensive as _Python & XML_
  (discussed below), but a solid start.  _Web Programming in
  Python_, in contrast, omits XML, but provides introductions (as
  the full title indicates) to Linux, Apache and MySQL.  Both
  books spend somewhere around 100 pages explaining Python
  itself, but _Python Web Programming_ does quite a bit more on
  the general networking libraries that come with Python.  Both
  books end with some sample concrete applications, based on the
  various topics covered earlier, but _Web Programming in Python_
  is probably a better choice if your goal is to use the samples
  as templates for your own development project--_Python Web
  Programming_ has a bit more of a reference/academic feel to it.

  Both books contain indices, but _Python Web Programming_ adds
  to that a glossary (helpful in the world of internet acronyms)
  and an appendix on changes in Python versions.  You will not go
  wrong with either title (assuming you are looking for something
  on Python and the web), but _Web Programming in Python_ feels a
  bit handier for a site-developer.  Assuming you -do- want to
  use Linux, Apache and MySQL, along with Python, _Web
  Programming in Python_ gives you enough to work with, without
  requiring two or three additional books.  Of course, if you
  insist on using Windows or, even worse, IIS/MSSQL for your
  site, less of _Web Programming in Python_ is relevant.  _Python
  Web Programming_ (mostly) sticks to material relevant across
  platforms.

Python & XML

  The short of it is that Jones and Drake's _Python & XML_ is the
  book you should by if you want to work with XML in Python.
  McGrath's _XML Processing with Python_, which I reviewed
  previously, at a certain level covers a similar range of
  material.  But in most every respect, I prefer Jones and
  Drake's book.  The writing in _Python & XML_ is clear,
  detailed, and generally precise--certainly in comparison to the
  XML standards documents it paraphrases.  There are a couple
  points where the intricacies of XML are characterized slightly
  wrong--such as the implication on page 27 that there are four
  rather than five inherent entities (omitting &amp;)--but in
  general, this is the best book I have encountered for
  understanding XML.

  As the title may or may not indicate, _Python & XML_ is really
  a book about XML, not one about Python.  That is, it contains
  no explanation of the Python language as such--readers are
  assumed to understand Python (but not necessarily the XML
  libraries).  The XML libraries addressed are basically
  fourfold:  the builtin support in Python 2.0+; the PyXML (of
  the XML-SIG); Fourthought Inc.'s 4Suite; and bindings for MSXML
  (on Windows).  Brief mention is made in an appendix of some
  other libraries (I personally wish that some of the tools I
  have written for developerWorks columns were mentioned, but
  that may be vanity).  In general, the examples in the book are
  compatible with Python's Standard Library XML support.


LEARNING THE LANGUAGE
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Python Programming Patterns

  Thomas W. Christopher's _Python Programming Patterns_ is an
  unusual book in the Python repertoire.  The title is obviously
  intended as a reference to the famous _Design Patterns:
  Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software_ by the so-called
  "Gang of Four (GoF)"--Gamma, Helm, Johnson, Vlissides.  But
  _Python Programming Patterns_ is not really a recapitulation of
  that other title into Python examples; it tries at the same
  time to be a first book on Python itself.  A few strikingly
  negative notices about Christopher's title have appeared on
  comp.lang.python; while I agree it has some weaknesses, I think
  the sentiment misunderstands the intent of the book.

  I think of _Python Programming Patterns_ not so much as a book
  about Python, but as a book about programming.  Each chapter
  introduces some new Python constructs, while simultaneously
  using those constructs to explain a few general computer
  science concepts.  As such, the target for Christopher's book
  is not so much a person trying to pick up Python as it is an
  introductory to middle-level course in computer science.  Some
  of the general concepts are interesting for even an advanced
  programmer to review.  That said, for its best matched purpose,
  _Python Programming Patterns_ spends far too much time
  explaining basic Python constructs.  Someone advanced enough to
  understand the "patterns" will -get- Python syntax quicker than
  this; someone just beginning programming will have the abstract
  concepts completely lost on them.  The book could use a bit
  better focus, overall.

Visual QuickStart Guide: Python

  The cover Chris Fehily's book for Peachpit Press boldly
  proclaims:  "Teach yourself Python the quick and easy way!
  This Visual QuickStart Guide uses pictures rather than lengthy
  explanations.  You'll be up and running in no time!"  Stop for
  a moment, and contemplate what the publisher decides to put in
  36 point font.  To my mind, this is a decidedly inauspicious
  beginning.  Then again, I think _USA Today_ also advertises
  itself as "America's most widely read newspaper."

  _Visual QuickStart Guide: Python_ is chock full of pictures,
  on literally every page.  Many of these are semi-relevant shell
  session samples; but quite a few others are almost completely
  superfluous pictures of web pages, or code listings that decide
  to include the window decorations of Fehily's text editor
  (usually under MacOS, in case anyone cares, but sometimes under
  Windows 2000).  In some cases some genuinely helpful tables and
  diagrams make it in there too.  Fehily's actual -writing- is
  pretty good.  But he is constrained by the publisher's style
  which precedes every paragraph by one of a half dozen different
  bullet styles (each apparently indicating something about the
  paragraph).  The little quips are well chosen and interesting,
  but it doesn't make for very systematic study of the Python
  language.

  On a lark, I decided to lookup a moderately obscure topic, the
  '.__delattr__()' magic method.  The index has no listing for
  this, and I presume it is not discussed.  Fair enough, this
  book is for beginners.  There is, however, a listing for the
  'delattr()' builtin function.  On page 261 we find a heading
  called "Manipulating Attributes", with a subheading that
  describes 'delattr()'.  With the busy page, I initially thought
  the form 'del obj.attr' was ommitted entirely; but it -is-
  mentioned in a little floating bullet elsewhere on the page.
  Even so, we are simply told that the two are equivalent (with
  no hint to why both exist).  If I did not have a good knowledge
  of Python, I think I would get the impression that it was a
  badly thought out language (rather than one that can deal with
  transient object names).

Core Python Programming

  I have seen a lot of good buzz around Wesley Chun's _Core
  Python Programming_.  It turns all the buzz is well earned.  I
  think this is the best book currently available for someone to
  use in independently learning Python (except those completely
  new to programming who are better off with Gauld's _Learn to
  Program Using Python_).  But I would recommend Chun's book
  above _Learning Python_, _Programming Python_, or _The Quick
  Python Book_, all of which are good; and I would -certainly-
  receommend any of these above _Programming with Python_ or
  _Python:  Annotated Archives_, neither of which I much liked.
  _Python 2.1 Bible_ was also good, but designed for a somewhat
  more advanced audience.

  The strategy of _Core Python Programming_ is a logical,
  progressive presentation of various Python features; but the
  book is organized well enough into chapters that it is not
  entirely necessary to read in order.  _Core Python
  Programming_ is not terrible as a reference, but it is more
  suited to learning Python in the first place.  One thing I
  really like about Chun's approach is that he is generous with
  presenting code samples illustrating each concept (but does not
  attempt to build a single growing application, as some texts
  do--an approach I find slightly contrived).  The explanation,
  organization, and typography is clear throughout (although the
  bottom margins are sometimes extremely small, even while the
  other margins are generous, which looks odd).

  The one complaint I have with Chun's book is that it is
  physically larger than I would like for easy carrying.  As a
  desk reference, the size is OK, but as a learning text, it is
  too big.  The font is rather large, and the paper rather thick.
  Combined with about 800 pages of length once you count the
  non-numbered pages, it is a hefty book.  Reducing the physical
  weight by 30% would be possible without losing any content, and
  would make for a more useful volume (maybe in the next
  edition).


REFERENCE MATERIAL
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Python Pocket Reference, 2nd Edition

  When I last looked at Mark Lutz' _Python Pocket Reference_ it
  was in its first edition.  Since then, Python has gone through
  some new versions, and Lutz and O'Reilly have updated this thin
  volume.  The obvious change, and what probably chiefly
  motivated the update, is that the 2nd edition covers Python 2.
  But in the process of getting updated, the _Python Pocket
  Reference_ has grown from 74 to 124 pages; to my mind nudging
  it into somewhat more substantial territory.  My previous
  complaints still mostly remain:  there is no index, and most of
  the time no real advantage over the online Language and Library
  references.  But the few extra pages make it a better book in
  my mind.  Beyond documenting new features, a sometimes
  clarification is added to the explanations of existing Python
  features--just enough possibly to warrant carrying the book
  around.  Of course, the cover price has correspondingly gone
  from US$6.95 to US$11.95, still perhaps more than it is worth
  for someone who does not get free review copies.

The DOSSIER Series

  A company called Prime Time Freeware publishes a number of
  books with an interesting twist to them.  All of their titles
  are based on documents in the public domain, or under liberal,
  royalty-free licenses.  Two of these books--in the so-called
  "Documenting Open Source Software for Industry, Education and
  Research (DOSSIER)" series are about Python:  _Python:  Library
  Reference_ and _Python:  Miscellanea_.  The first covers
  exactly what the title says, the latter includes a number of
  smaller documents, such as Greg Ward's "Distributing Python
  Modules," Fred Drake's "Documenting Python," the Python
  Reference Manual, the Python Tutorial, and other documents
  taken from python.org.  One set of documents omitted would, in
  my opinion, be valuable to include--Andrew Kuchling's excellent
  series "What's New in Python X.X?" is the best way to see what
  has changed between versions.

  There is not much I can really add about the content of these
  books.  You can read them for yourself online, and I have
  previously praised the high quality of Python's standard
  documentation.  I can observe that the DOSSIER books are nicely
  laid out, with a good font and paper stock, and an attractive
  (although common between titles) cover design.  Apparently the
  series is physically printed in a print-on-demand arrangement,
  to avoid warehousing copies.  As such, I might expect the
  documentation to be more up-to-date than Python 2.0 (the layout
  is some work, but it is closely based on what the Python team
  provides as LaTeX, Postscript, or other printable formats).
  Moreover, as much as I like printed books, I am not sure that
  $35 is really a fair price for otherwise free words (especially
  since commercially copyrighted books usually sell at a
  discount from cover price).  The DOSSIER books are available
  through Prime Time Freeware's website (shipped by BSDMall), and
  do not carry an ISBN.



RESOURCES
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  _Python Web Programming_, Steve Holden with David Beazley, New
  Riders, 2002.  ISBN: 0-7357-1090-2.

  _Web Programming in Python:  Techniques for Integrating Linux,
  Apache, and MySQL_, George K. Thiruvathukal, Thomas W.
  Christopher & John P. Shafaee, Prentice Hall, 2002.  ISBN:
  0-13-041065-9.

  _Python Programming Patterns_, Thoma W. Christopher, Prentice
  Hall 2002. ISBN: 0-13-040956-1.

  _Python & XML_, Christopher A. Jones & Fred L. Drake, Jr.,
  O'Reilly 2002. ISBN: 0-596-00128-2.

  _XML Processing with Python_, Sean McGrath, Prentice Hall,
  2000.  ISBN: 0-13-021119-2.

  _Python Pocket Reference_, 2nd Edition, Mark Lutz, O'Reilly,
  2002.  ISBN:  1-596-00189-4.

  Prime Time Freeware's titles can be examined at:

    http://ptf.com/

  Andrew Kuchling's "What's New" series can be found on his
  website (along with some other documents and modules he has
  written):

    http://www.amk.ca/python/

  _Visual QuickStart Guide:  Python_, Chris Fehily, Peachpit
  Press, 2002.  ISBN: 0-201074884-3.

  _Core Python Programming_, Wesley J. Chun, Prentice Hall, 2001.
  ISBN:


ABOUT THE AUTHOR
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  {Picture of Author: http://gnosis.cx/cgi-bin/img_dqm.cgi}
  David Mertz' failures as a hunter, fisherman, and shepherd have
  led him to his life of critical criticism.  Tomorrow he may try
  something else.  David may be reached at mertz@gnosis.cx; his
  life pored over at http://gnosis.cx/publish/.  Suggestions and
  recommendations on this, past, or future, columns are welcomed.

