TUTORIAL FOR LPI EXAM 202: part 6
Topic 212: System Security

David Mertz, Ph.D.
Professional Neophyte
February, 2006

    Welcome to "System Security", the sixth of seven tutorials covering
    intermediate network administration on Linux. This tutorial touches
    on a wide array of topics related to using Linux as a
    security-conscious network server, of necessity each somewhat
    cursorily. General issues of routing, firewalls and NAT translation
    are discussed and the relevant tools presented. Setting security
    policies for FTP and SSH are addressed also. General access control
    with 'tcpd', 'hosts.allow' and friends is reviewed. Finally, some
    basic scurity monitoring tools are presented, as well as where to
    find security resources.

BEFORE YOU START
------------------------------------------------------------------------

About this series

  The Linux Professional Institute (LPI) certifies Linux system
  administrators at junior and intermediate levels. There are two exams
  at each certification level. This series of seven tutorials helps you
  prepare for the second of the two LPI intermediate level system
  administrator exams--LPI exam 202. A companion series of tutorials is
  available for the other intermediate level exam--LPI exam 201. Both
  exam 201 and exam 202 are required for intermediate level
  certification. Intermediate level certification is also known as
  certification level 2.

  Each exam covers several or topics and each topic has a weight. The
  weight indicate the relative importance of each topic. Very roughly,
  expect more questions on the exam for topics with higher weight. The
  topics and their weights for LPI exam 202 are:

  * Topic 205: Network Configuration (8)
  * Topic 206: Mail and News (9)
  * Topic 207: Domain Name System (DNS) (8)
  * Topic 208: Web Services (6)
  * Topic 210: Network Client Management (6)
  * Topic 212: System Security (10)
  * Topic 214: Network Troubleshooting (1)

About this tutorial

  Welcome to "System Security", the sixth of seven tutorials covering
  intermediate network administration on Linux. This tutorial touches on
  a wide array of topics related to using Linux as a security-conscious
  network server, of necessity each somewhat cursorily. General issues
  of routing, firewalls and NAT translation are discussed and the
  relevant tools presented. Setting security policies for FTP and SSH
  are addressed also. General access control with 'tcpd', 'hosts.allow'
  and friends is reviewed (reiterating the discussion in LPI 201, Topic
  209: File Sharing Servers). Finally, some basic scurity monitoring
  tools are presented, as well as where to find security resources.

Prerequisites

  To get the most from this tutorial, you should already have a basic
  knowledge of Linux and a working Linux system on which you can
  practice the commands covered in this tutorial.

Other resources

  As with most Linux tools, it is always useful to examine the manpages
  for any utilities discussed. Versions and switches might change
  between utility or kernel version, or with different Linux
  distributions. For more in depth information, the Linux Documentation
  Project has a variety of useful documents, especially its HOWTOs. See
  http://www.tldp.org/. A variety of books on Linux networking have been
  published, consult your local bookseller or library for latest titles
  on Linux security issues.

ROUTING, FIREWALLS AND NETWORK ADDRESS TRANSLATION
------------------------------------------------------------------------

About packet filtering

  The Linux kernel includes "netfilter" infrastructure, which gives you
  the the capability of filtering network packages. Usually this
  capability is compiled into the base kernel, but a kernel module may
  be needed for the capability. However, module loading should be
  seamless: i.e. running 'iptables' will load 'iptables_filter.o' it it
  needs it. Packet filtering is controlled with the utility 'iptables'
  in modern Linux systems; older systems used 'ipchains', and before
  that 'ipfwadm'. While you -can- still use 'ipchains' in conjunction
  with recent kernels if backward compatibility is needed, you will
  almost always prefer to use the enhanced capabilities and improved
  syntax in 'iptables'. That said, most of the concepts and switches in
  'iptables' are compatible enhancements to 'ipchains'.

  Depending on the exact scenario of filtering (firewall, NAT, etc.)
  filtering and address translation may occur either before or after
  routing itself. The same 'ipchains' tool is used in either case, but
  different rule sets ("chains") are used for the cases: at base, INPUT
  and OUTPUT. Filtering, however, can also affect the routing decision
  by filtering on the FORWARD chain; this may lead to dropping packets
  rather than routing them.

Routing

  As well as filtering with 'iptables' (or legacy 'ipchains'), the Linux
  kernel performs -routing- of IP packets it receives. Routing is a
  simpler process than filtering, though the two are conceptually
  related. A host, during routing, simply looks at a destination IP
  address, and decides whether it knows how deliver to a packet directly
  to that address, or whether a gateway is available that knows how to
  deliver to that address.  If a host can neither deliver a packet
  itself nor knows what gateway to forward it to, the packet is dropped.
  However, typical configurations include a "default gateway" that
  handles every otherwise unspecified address.

  Configuration and display of routing information is peformed with the
  utility 'route'. However, routing may either be static or dynamic.
  With static routing, delivery is determined by a routing table that is
  explicitly configured by invocations of the 'route' command and its
  'add' or 'del' commands. However, often more useful is configuring
  dynamic routing using the 'routed' or 'gated' daemons that broadcast
  routing information to adjacent routing daemons. The 'routed' daemon
  supports the Routing Information Protocol (RIP); the 'gated' daemon
  adds support for a number of other protocols (and can use multiple
  protocols at once): Routing Information Protocol Next
  Generation (RIPng), Exterior Gateway Protocol (EGP), Border Gateway
  Protocol (BGP) and BGP4+, Defense Communications Network Local-Network
  Protocol (HELLO), Open Shortest Path First (OSPF), Intermediate System
  to Intermediate System (IS-IS), and Internet Control Message Protocol
  (ICMP and ICMPv6)/Router Discovery.

  Let us take a look at a fairly typical static routing table:

      % /sbin/route
      Kernel IP routing table
      Destination   Gateway         Genmask         Flags Metric Ref  Use Iface
      66.98.217.0   *               255.255.255.0   U     0      0      0 eth0
      10.10.12.0    *               255.255.254.0   U     0      0      0 eth1
      66.98.216.0   *               255.255.254.0   U     0      0      0 eth0
      169.254.0.0   *               255.255.0.0     U     0      0      0 eth1
      default       ev1s-66-98-216- 0.0.0.0         UG    0      0      0 eth0

  What this means is that addresses in the 66.98.217/24 and 66.98.216/23
  ranges will be directly delivered over 'eth0'.  Address ranges
  10.10.12/23 and 169.254/16 will be delivered on 'eth1'.  Anything left
  over will be sent to the gateway 'ev1s-66-98-216-1.ev1servers.net'
  (the name is cut off in the 'route' display; you could also use 'route
  -n' to see that name was IP address 66.98.216.1).  If you wanted to
  add a different gateway for some other address ranges, you might run
  something like:

      % route add -net 192.168.2.0 netmask 255.255.255.0 gw 192.168.2.1 dev eth0

  For a machine that serves as a gateway itself, you will generally want
  to run dynamic routing, using the 'routed' or 'gated' daemons, which
  may supplement a smaller number of static routes.  The 'routed' daemon
  is configured by the contents of '/etc/gateways'.  The 'gated' daemon
  is more modern, and has more capabilities as indicated, and is
  configured by '/etc/gated.conf'.  Generally if you use either of
  these, you will want to launch them in your startup scripts.  You
  *must not* run both 'routed' and 'gated' on the same machine, results
  will be unpredictable, and almost certainly not desirable.

Filtering with 'iptables'

  The Linux kernel stores a table of filter rules for IP packets that
  form a sort of state-machine. Sets of rules that are processed in
  sequence are know as "(firewall) chains". When one chain meets a
  condition, one of the possible actions is to shift control to
  processing another chain, as in a state-machine.  Before you have
  added any rules or states, three chains are automatically present:
  INPUT, OUTPUT and FORWARD.  The INPUT chain is where packets addressed
  to the host machine passes, and potentially from there to a local
  application process.  The FORWARD chain is where a packet addressed to
  a different machine passes, assuming forwarding is enabled and the
  routing system knows how to forward that packet.  A packet generated
  on the local host is sent into the OUTPUT chain for filtering--if it
  passes the filters in the OUTPUT chain (or any linked chains), it is
  routed out over its network interface.

  One action that a rule can take is to DROP a packet; in that case,
  naturally, no further rule processing or state transition is taken for
  that packet. But if a packet is not dropped, the next rule in a chain
  is examined to see if it matches the packet. In some cases,
  satisfaction of a rule will branch processing to a different chain,
  and its set of rules. Creation, deletion or modification of rules, and
  of chains in which rules live is performed with the tool 'iptables'.
  In older Linux systems, the same function was done using 'ipchains'
  instead.  The concepts behind both tools, and even for the ancient
  'ipfwadm' are similar, but 'iptables' syntax is discussed here.

  A rule specifices a set of conditions that a packet might meet, and
  what action to take if the packet does meet that condition.  As
  mentioned, one common action is to DROP packets.  For example, suppose
  you wanted (for some reason) to disable 'ping' on the loopback
  interace (i.e. the ICMP interface).  You could enable this with:

      % iptables -A INPUT -s 127.0.0.1 -p icmp -j DROP

  Of course, that is a silly rule, and we probably want to remove it
  after we test it, e.g.:

      % iptables -D INPUT -s 127.0.0.1 -p icmp -j DROP

  Deleting a rule with the '-D' option requires either exactly the same
  options as specified when it was added, or specification by rule
  number (which you, therefore, must determine first), e.g.:

      % iptables -D INPUT 1

  A more interesting rule might look at source and destination addresses
  in packets. For example, suppose that a problem remote network is
  trying to utilize services on a particular subnet of your network.
  You might block this on your gateway/firewall machine with, e.g.:

      % iptables -A INPUT -s 66.98.216/24 -d 64.41.64/24 -j DROP

  Doing this will stop anything from the '66.98.216.*' IP block from
  communicating with anything in the local '64.41.64.*' subnet.  Of
  course, singling out a specific IP block for blacklisting is fairly
  limited as protection.  A more likely scenario might be to -allow-
  only a specific IP block to access a local subnet, e.g.:

      % iptables -A INPUT -s ! 66.98.216/24 -d 64.41.64/24 -j DROP

  In this case, -only- the '66.98.216.*' IP block can access the
  specified subnet. Moreover, you can use a symbolic name for a address,
  and can specify a particular protocol to be filtered. You can also
  select a specific network interface (e.g. 'eth0') to filter, but that
  is less commonly useful. For example, to let only a specific remote
  network access a local web server, you might use:

      % iptables -A INPUT -s ! example.com -d 64.41.64.124 -p TCP -sport 80 -j DROP

   There are a number of other options you can specify with 'iptables',
   including for example rate limits on the number of packets that will
   be allowed, or filtering on TCP flags.  See the manpage for
   'iptables' for more details.

User defined chains

  We have seen the basics of adding rules to the automatic chains. But
  much of the configurability in 'iptables' comes with adding user
  defined chains, and branching to them if patterns are matched. New
  chains are defined with the '-N' option, and branching we have already
  seen, using the special target DROP. ACCEPT is also a special target
  with the obivous meaning. Also, special targets RETURN and QUEUE are
  available. The first means to stop processing a given chain, and
  return to its parent/caller. The QUEUE handler lets you pass packets
  to a user space process for further processing (which might be
  logging, modification of the packet, or more elaborate filtering than
  'iptables' supports).  The simple example in Rusty Russell's "Linux
  2.4 Packet Filtering HOWTO" is a good example of adding a user defined
  chain:

      # Create chain to block new connections, except established locally
      % iptables -N block
      % iptables -A block -m state --state ESTABLISHED,RELATED -j ACCEPT
      % iptables -A block -m state --state NEW -i ! ppp0 -j ACCEPT
      % iptables -A block -j DROP  # DROP everything else not ACCEPT'd
      # Jump to that chain from INPUT and FORWARD chains
      % iptables -A INPUT -j block
      % iptables -A FORWARD -j block

  Notice that the "block" chain ACCEPTs in a limited class of cases,
  then the final rule DROPs everything not previously ACCEPT'd.

  Once you have established some chains, whether adding rules to the
  automatic chains or adding user defined chains, you may use the '-L'
  option to view the current rules.

Network address translation versus firewalls

  The examples we have looked at are basically in the class of firewall
  rules. But Network Address Translation (NAT) is also configured by
  'iptables'. Basically, NAT is a way of using connection tracking to
  masquerade packets coming from a local subnet address as the external
  WAN address before sending them out "over the wire" (on the OUTPUT
  chain). The gateway/router that performs NAT needs to remember which
  local host connected to which remote host, and reverse the address
  translation if packets arrive back from the remote host. From a
  filtering perspective though, you simply pretend that NAT did not
  exist. The rules you specify should simply use the "real" local
  addresses, regardless of how NAT might masquerade them to the outside
  world. Enabling masquerading, i.e. basic NAT, just uses the below
  'iptables' command. To use this you will need to make sure the kernel
  module 'iptables_nat' is loaded, and also turn on IP forwarding.
  E.g.:

      % modprobe iptables_nat    # Load the kernel module
      % iptables -t nat -A POSTROUTING -o eth0 -j MASQUERADE
      % echo 1 > /proc/sys/net/piv4/ip_forward   # Turn on IP forwarding

  This capability is what is actually called "Source NAT". That is, the
  address of the outgoing packet is modified. "Destination NAT" (DNAT)
  also exists to enable port forwarding, load sharing, and transparent
  proxying. In those cases, incoming packets are modified to get to the
  relevent local host or subnet. But most of the time when users, or
  even administrators, talk about NAT, they mean source NAT. If you mean
  to configure destination NAT, you would specify "PREROUTING" rather
  than "POSTROUTING". That is for DNAT, the packets are transformed
  before they are routed.

FILE TRANSFER PROTOCOL
------------------------------------------------------------------------

FTP servers

  Many different FTP servers are available for Linux, and different
  distributions distribute different servers.  Naturally, configuration
  of different servers vary, though most tend to follow similar
  configuration directives.  A popular FTP server is 'vsftpd' (Very
  Secure FTP daemon).  ProFTP is also in wide use, as are 'wu-ftpd' and
  'ncftpd'.  For many purposes, FTP is not really needed at all.  For
  example, secure transfers for users who have accounts on a server
  machine can often be accomplished using 'scp' (secure copy), which
  relies on the underlying SSH installation, but otherwise mostly mimics
  the familiar 'cp' command.

  The configuration file for 'vsftpd' is '/etc/vsftpd.conf'.  Other FTP
  servers use similar files.

FTP configuration options

  A few options to keep in mind in '/etc/vsftpd.conf' (and probably in
  your server if you use a different one) are listed here:

    anonymous_enabled: Let anonymous users login using the usernames
    "anonymous" or "ftp".

    anon_mkdir_write_enable: Let anonymous users create directories
    (within world writable parent directories).

    anon_upload_enable: Let anonymous users upload files.

    anon_world_readable_only: YES by default, and rarely a good idea to
    change.  Only lets anonymous FTP access world-readable files.

    chroot_list_enable:  Specify a set of users (listed in
    '/etc/vsftpd.chroot-list') in a "chroot jail" in their home
    directory upon login.

    ssl_enable: Support SSL encrypted connections.

  Read the manpages for your FTP server for more complete options.
  Generally, running an FTP server is as simple as tweaking a
  configuration file and running the server within your intilization
  scripts.

SECURE SHELL
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Client and server

  Most every Linux machine, and most other operating systems, should
  have a secure shell (SSH) client. Often, the OpenSSH version is used,
  but a variety of compatible SSH clients are sometimes used. While an
  SSH client is essential to connect to a host, the larger security
  issues arise in properly configuring an SSH server. Since a client
  initiates a connection to a server, the client is actively choosing to
  trust the server. Just having an SSH client does not allow any
  kind of access -into- a machine, and hence does not expose
  vulnerabilities. Configuring a server is also not particularly
  complex, and the server daemon is designed to enable and enforce good
  security practices.  But clearly it is a server that is sharing
  resources with clients, based on requests from the clients the server
  decides to honor.

  The SSH protocol has two versions, version 1 and version 2. In modern
  systems, using protocol version 2 is always preferred, but generally
  both clients and servers maintain backward compatibility with version
  1 (unless this capability is disabled with configuration options);
  this lets you connect to increasingly uncommon version 1-only systems.
  Somewhat different configuration files are used between version 1 and
  version 2 protocols. For protocol version 1, a client first creates an
  RSA key pair using 'ssh-keygen', and stores the private key in
  '$HOME/.ssh/identity' and the public key in '$HOME/.ssh/identity.pub'.
  This same 'identity.pub' should be appended to the remote
  '$HOME/.ssh/authorized_keys' files. Obviously, there is a
  chicken-and-egg problem here: how can you copy a file to a remote
  system before you have access? Fortunately, SSH also supports a
  fallback authentication method of sending encrypted-on-the-wire
  passwords that are evaluated through the usual remote-system login
  tests (i.e. the user account must exist, and the right password must
  be provided).

  Protocol 2 supports both RSA and DSA keys, but RSA authentication is
  somewhat enhanced rather than identical to that in protocol 1.  For
  protocol 2, private keys are stored in '$HOME/.ssh/id_rsa' and
  '$HOME/.ssh/id_dsa'.  Protocol 2 also supports a number of extra
  confidentiality and integrity algorithms: AES, 3DES, Blowfish,
  CAST128, HMAC-MD5, HMAC-SHA1, and so on.  The server can be configured
  as to preferred algorithms, and order of fallbacks.

  For general configuration options, rather than key information, the
  client stores its in '/etc/ssh/ssh_config' or if available
  '/$HOME/.ssh/config'.  Client options can also be configured with the
  '-o' switch; a particularly common switch is the '-X' or '-x' to
  enable or disable X11 forwarding.  If enabled, the X11 port is
  tunnelled through SSH to enable encrypted X11 connections.  Tools like
  'scp' also use similar port forwarding over SSH.  For example, to on
  the local machine I am working on I can launch onto the local display
  an X11 application that only exists remotely (on my local subnet in
  this case), e.g.:

      $ which gedit  # not on local system
      $ ssh -X dqm@192.168.2.2
      Password:
      Linux averatec 2.6.10-5-386 #1 Mon Oct 10 11:15:41 UTC 2005 i686 GNU/Linux
      No mail.
      Last login: Thu Feb 23 03:51:15 2006 from 192.168.2.101
      dqm@averatec:~$ gedit &

Configuring the server

  The 'sshd' daemon, specifically the OpenSSH version available from
  <http://www.openssh.org/>, enables secure encrypted communications
  between two untrusted hosts over an insecure network. The base 'sshd'
  server is normally started during initialization, and listens for
  cleitn connections forking a new daemon for each client connection.
  The forked daemons handle key exchange, encryption, authentication,
  command execution, and data exchange.

  As with the client tool, the 'sshd' server accepts a variety of
  options on the command-line, but is normally configured by the file
  '/etc/ssh/sshd_config'. A number of other configuration files are used
  also. For example, the access controls '/etc/hosts.allow' and
  '/etc/hosts.deny' are honored. Keys are stored in a similar fashion to
  the client side, in '/etc/ssh/ssh_host_key' (protocol 1),
  '/etc/ssh/ssh_host_dsa_key', '/etc/ssh/ssh_host_rsa_key', and public
  keys in '/etc/ssh/ssh_host_dsa_key.pub' and friends.  Also as with the
  client, you will use 'ssh-keygen' to generate keys in the first place.
  See the manpage for 'sshd' and 'ssh-keygen' for details on
  configuration files and copying generated keys to appropriate files.

  Theere are a large number of configuration options in
  '/etc/ssh/sshd_config', and the default values are generally sensible
  (and sensibly secure).  A few options are particularly notable though.
  'AllowTcpForwarding' enables or disables port forwarding (tunneling),
  and is "yes" by default.  'Ciphers' controls the list and order of
  encryption algorithms to be utilized.  'AllowUsers' and 'AllowGroups'
  accept wildcard patterns and allow you to control which users may even
  attempt further authentication.  'DenyGroups' and 'DenyUsers' act
  symmetrically, as you would expect.  'PermitRootLogin' lets the "root"
  user SSH into a machine.  'Protocol' lets you specify whether both
  protocol versions are accepted (and if not, which one is).
  'TCPKeepAlive' is good to look at if you are loosing SSH connections.
  A "keepalive" message is sent to check connections if this is enabled,
  but this can cause disconnection if transient errors occur in the
  route.

SSH tunneling

  OpenSSH lets you create a tunnel to encapsulate another protocol
  within an encrypted SSH channel. This capability is enabled on the
  'sshd' server by default, but could have been disabled with
  command-line or configuration file options. Assuming the capability is
  enabled, a client can easily emulate whatever port/protocol they wish
  to use for a connection. For example, to create a tunnel for telnet:

      % ssh -2 -N -f -L 5023:localhost:23 user@foo.example.com
      % telnet localhost 5023

  This example, of course, if fairly pointless since a SSH command shell
  does the same thing as a 'telnet' shell. But you could create a POP3,
  HTTP, SMTP, FTP, X11, or other protocol connection in the analogous
  manner. The basic concept is that a particular localhost port acts as
  if it were the remote service, with actual communication packets
  travelling over the SSH connection in encrypted form.

  The options we used in the example are: '-2' (use protocol 2); '-N'
  (no command/tunnel only), '-f' (SSH in background); '-L' (describe
  tunnel as "localport:remotehost:remoteport".  The server (with
  username) are also specified.

TCP WRAPPERS
------------------------------------------------------------------------

What is 'tcp_wrappers'?

  The first thing to know about TCP_wrappers is that you -should not-
  use it, and it is not actively maintained. However, you might find the
  'tcpd' daemon from TCP_wrappers still running on a legacy system. In
  its time, this was a good application, but its functionality has been
  superceded by 'iptables' and other tools. The general purpose of
  TCP_wrappers is to monitor and filter incoming requests for the
  SYSTAT, FINGER, FTP, TELNET, RLOGIN, RSH, EXEC, TFTP, TALK, and other
  network services.

  TCP_wrappers can be configured in a couple manners. One is to
  substitute 'tcpd' for other servers, providing arguments to pass
  control on to the particular server once 'tcpd' has done its logging
  and filtering. Another method leave the network daemons alone and
  modifies the 'inetd' configuration file. For example, an entry such
  as:

      tftp  dgram  udp  wait  root  /usr/etc/tcpd  in.tftpd -s /tftpboot

   Causes an incoming 'tftp' request to run through the wrapper program
   ('tcpd') with a process name 'in.tftpd'.

SECURITY TASKS
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Resources

  A few tools and sites are worth keeping in mind for a Linux
  administrator minding security.  Websites worth monitoring for
  security issues and patches include:

    * Security Focus news <http://www.securityfocus.com/>.  The Security
    Focus website is one of the best sites for reporting and discussion
    of security issues and specific vulnerabilities.  The site includes
    a number of newsletters and alertes you can subscribe to, as well as
    general columns and searchable bug reports.

    * The Bugtraq mailing list <http://www.securityfocus.com/archive/1>
    is a full disclosure moderated mailing list for the -detailed-
    discussion and announcement of computer security vulnerabilities:
    what they are, how to exploit them, and how to fix them.

    * CERT Coordination Center <http://www.cert.org/>.  Hosted by
    Carnegie Mellon University, CERT has a similar range of advisories
    as Security Focus site, with a bit more emphasis on tutorials and
    guidelines.  Keeping track of multiple such sites is a good way to
    make sure you are current on all the security incident affecting
    your OS, distribution, and specific tools or servers.

    * Computer Incident Adisory Capability
    <http://www.ciac.org/ciac/index.html>. CIAC Information Bulletins
    are distributed to the Department of Energy community to notify
    sites of computer security vulnerabilities and recommended actions.
    Similarly, CIAC Advisory Notices serve to alert sites to severe,
    time-critical vulnerabilities and solutions to be applied as soon as
    is possible. CIAC Technical Bulletins cover technical security
    issues and analyses of a less time sensitive nature.

    * Information on securing open mail relays
    <http://www.ordb.org/faq/>.  A common vulnerability on systems with
    mail servers is failure to properly secure systems against malicious
    use by spammer and fraudulent mailers.  The Open Relay Database
    provides both tutorials on security particular mail tools, open
    relay testing online tools, and a database of known problem servers
    that can be used to configure blacklists if site administrators so
    desire.

  Tools to monitor security you might consider running are:

    * Open Source Tripwire <http://sourceforge.net/projects/tripwire/>:
    A security and data integrity tool for monitoring and alerting on
    specific file changes.

    * 'scanlogd' <http://www.openwall.com/scanlogd/>: A TCP port scan
    detection tool.

    * Snort <http://www.snort.org/>: Network intrusion prevention and
    detection, utilizing a rule-driven language. Uses signature,
    protocol and anomaly based inspection methods.
