PRODUCT REVIEW:
XML Instance 1.1

David Mertz, Ph.D.
Gnosis Software, Inc.
November 2000

AT A GLANCE
------------------------------------------------------------------------

      Creator:       TIBCO Extensibility
      Price/License: $99.95. Closed-source.
      Home Page:     http://www.extensibility.com/

  This review is one in new series by David that cover
  specialized XML content editors.  Review of XML Spy and XMetal
  appeared earlier on Webreview.com.  Additional reviews will
  follow.  If readers would like to see other XML editors
  reviewed, they are encouraged to contact the author or WR's
  editors.


WHAT IS XML Instance?
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Let us let TIBCO Extensibility describe their product in their
  own words as a starting point:
  
    XML Instance™ is a breakthrough product for schema-driven
    data editing that allows for the creation, editing, and
    management of data-oriented XML documents, messages, and
    configuration files.

  As is common in marketing, the makers exaggerate a bit in
  characterizing their product.  But while XML Instance is not
  exactly a breakthrough, it *is* a friendly tool for working
  with XML documents that provides a distinctive interface
  design.  In overall purpose, XML Instance is quite close to the
  other XML editors I have reviewed.
  
  XML Instance does not entirely stand on its own.  Besides
  editing XML documents with XML Instance, TIBCO Extensibility
  would like you to develop schemas with XML Authority and to
  perform batch processing of documents with XML Console.  They
  market this set of projects jointly as Turbo XML (for $269,
  more than XML Instance by itself, but less than the collection
  of products purchased individually).
  
  One noteworthy features of XML Instance is that it is a Java
  application.  There are pros and cons to using Java.  I have
  found the speed of XML Instance to be adequate on a 366Mhz,
  Win95 machine, but nonetheless notably slower than a native
  compiled application (especially during startup).  My own
  experience has also been that some JVM's are notably faster and
  more stable than others (IBM's have stood out as extremely
  good, on several platforms).  Although I do not blame TIBCO
  Extensibility, I experienced screen redraw problems until I
  installed a different JVM.  On the obvious plus side, by
  writing XML Instance in Java, TIBCO Extensibility supports
  Win32, Mac, and UNIX at the same time.  This is far better
  cross-platform support than other XML products I have reviewed
  to date.

EDITING WITH XML INSTANCE
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  The interface for XML Instance uses an interesting concept, a
  bit different from similar products.  A shaded and hierarchical
  summary of the elements appears to the left of the display. 
  Elements (and any subelements they contain) may be folded away
  and revealed, and may also be marked in highlight colors to
  make certain elements stand out.  Furthermore, each element may
  be treated as either a hierarchical branch, or merely as
  marked-up text.  The effect of this is to allow you to easily
  gloss over the details of character-level markup by excluding
  it from the left-hand hierarchical summary.  It really makes
  viewing text-oriented documents easier.  
  
  A picture is worth a thousand words here.
  
  {Screenshot of XML Instance:
   http://gnosis.cx/publish/programming/xml_i.gif}
  
  In those cases where elements are viewed as hierarchical
  containers, the DTD/Schema specification of their allowed
  contents are shown to the right.  Where maked-up text mode is
  chosen for a given element, to the right is the actual text
  (including markup) contained in the element.
  
  What is nice about mark-up view on elements is that initially
  only the first line of element contents is displayed.  At the
  right edge of the element display is an elipsis; when you click
  on the elipsis button, you unfold display of the entire
  contents.  What this gets you is a way to look at long
  documents and have a good sense of their overall contents, but
  still zoom into the details where needed; it works in much the
  manner of *folding* in a text editor, which is something I find
  greatly useful.

  Unfortunately, there is not much more to XML Instance than I   
  have described, at least in terms of creating and editing a
  document.  Other tools provide much more by way of contextual
  prompts for available elements, various views of the document
  content, and editing assistants.  XML Instance has a good
  interface, but it is quite spartan and minimal, in the end. 
  There may not be quite enough "there" there.
  
TOOLS IN XML INSTANCE  
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  There are two primary tools I would want in an XML editor.  I
  want to validate the document I am working on and I
  want to transform my document to other formats (ideally by
  using XSLT, but CSS2, DSSSL, or other means are options).  XML
  Instance provides both of my desired tools, although with mixed
  results.
  
  In terms of document transformations, XML Instance shines; at
  least as far as my DocBook document and custom XSLT stylesheet
  for HTML rendering go.  Both XMetal and XML Spy choke in odd
  ways on this transformation (producing gibberish output, while
  Sabletron operates correctly on the same files).  XML Instance
  behaves exactly correctly.  I can preview my document in a web
  browser right from a menu option, and I can save the
  transformation directly with another menu option.  XML Instance
  is even happy to let me edit my XSLT stylesheet in another
  window.
  
  As to validation, however, XML Instance seems not to do quite
  as well.  My test DocBook document (based on a quite complex
  DTD that seems to have some subtle problems of its own)
  validates as 100% OK in XMetal, XML Spy, and in several
  command-line tools.  XML Instance, on the other hand, complains
  of several missing mandatory subelements to several elements. 
  XML Instance is correct that they are not there, but everything
  it complains about is optional rather than mandatory.


ABOUT THE AUTHOR
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  While still probably less than many of his readers, David Mertz
  is starting to feel like he knows altogether too much about
  matters XML.  You can find out copious biographical details by
  sailing to http://gnosis.cx/publish/.
