PRODUCT REVIEW:
PerlBuilder 2.0

David Mertz, Ph.D.
Gnosis Software, Inc.
October 2000

AT A GLANCE
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Creator: Solutionsoft <info@solutionsoft.com>
    Price/License: Commercial ($149 Standard, $249 Professional)
    Home Page: http://www.solutionsoft.com/index.html
    Requirements: Win32 or Linux (Professional only)


BACKGROUND
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  OK, I have a confession to start this review.  Perl confuses
  me.  Sure, I have written a script here and there to perform a
  bit of text processing, and modified a few others.  But I am
  far from being one of those Perl wizards who know just what
  each funny symbol means in each unusual context.  Therefore, I
  was quite excited by the advertised capabilities of Perl
  Builder:

    Whether you are a programmer or an HTML author/Website
    designer without a programming background, Perl Builder 2.0
    Standard makes it fast and easy to create and test scripts.

    Perl Builder's powerful CGI Wizard lets you design
    form-handling scripts visually. You can create scripts to
    handle any HTML form, validate user input, save user data to
    a file on your website, send multiple automatic emails, and
    then display personalized HTML output to the user--all
    without writing code!


WHAT IS PERL BUILDER?
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Here's the lowdown:  Perl Builder is a good IDE for working
  with Perl projects--in fact, it is a *very* good IDE.  But
  don't count on doing any realistic CGI projects without writing
  mostly your own code.  A lot of products have floated claims of
  "codeless" application development "wizards" or "assistants."
  None of them lives up to promises, so it is no shock that Perl
  Builder doesn't do this either.

  Solutionsoft gave its marketers a bit too much rope; that was
  a mistake, sure.  But Solutionsoft also let its developers
  create a quite excellent Perl development environment; so any
  sins are more than compensated.

  Rather than focus on drag-and-drop everything, and endless
  toolbars and widgets for every task (as some IDE's do), Perl
  Builder chooses to create a good code editor accompanied by a
  collection of all the most useful tools for running, testing,
  timing, debugging, and understanding code.  In my opinion, this
  is the right way to go.  The one limitation to Solutionsoft's
  approach is that Perl Builder is not really of particular
  facility in developing GUI applications; there is no widget
  pallet or properties lists (how many Perl programmers really
  use OOP anyway?).  But what Perl Builder sells itself on is its
  ability to aid a developer of CGI's and batch scripts.  For
  that, it is ideal.

  The basic interface to Perl Builder is a multi-tabbed text
  editor with a couple of special tabs for web-browser-like input
  and output (and for simulation of standard output or piped
  output). The text editor part is quite good (but obviously
  specific to Perl-related files for many features).  You get
  what you would expect in a programmers' text editor:  syntax
  highlighting, bookmarks, indent/outdent of blocks, regular
  expression search and replace (it *is* Perl, after all);
  automation of commenting.  Per its IDE function, you get a nice
  dialog called "Subroutine Navigator." You don't get folding
  (which the free PythonWin has in about the same niche), which
  might be nice. You also do not get text-document features like
  wordwrap and reformatting options; but then, you don't need
  those to edit Perl code.  One thing you *do* get is an
  amazingly powerful editor macro language (no prize awarded for
  guessing what it is).

  Beyond the editor itself Perl Builder has the extra features
  you want in an IDE.  You can set breakpoints in your code, and
  variable watches, and timers.  It is easy to both debug and
  profile your code in this manner.  With breakpoints, you get
  the usual options about stepping through code and running to
  other breakpoints.  Watches can include any variable you want,
  but a quick watchlist of standard variables is available in
  another dialog.  The dialogs associated with the various code
  analysis functions are usually always-on-top windows that let
  you see what is going on even as you are running or editing
  code in the main frame.  Perl Builder does not use dockable
  panes for these functions in the style of many MS applications
  (the feel is similar to many XWindow interfaces, even though
  Perl Builder's first home is MS-Windows).

  The way that Perl Builder "simulates" a CGI is really quite
  helpful.  You can enter input in a browser-like tabbed-pane,
  and find the HTML output in another pane (with a button to
  view it in an actual web browser).  For working with
  command-line applications, the "Interactive I/O" floating
  dialog is equally convenient.  Between these two simulations,
  you can stay within Perl Builder for almost all of your
  development cycle (one always wants to test the final thing in
  the actual production environment, of course).  That makes for
  a nice advantage over a plain text editor.

  One thing I really like about Perl Builder is its help system.
  Integrated into Perl Builder are both WinHelp versions of a
  Perl function reference, a nice "pod Viewer", and links to a
  variety of online (or locally mirrored) help documents.  When
  viewing CPAN's standard Perl documentation, Perl Builder wraps
  the help in a navigation frame, which works nicely.


IS IT WORTH IT?
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  The final question about Perl Builder might be the toughest.
  Perl is free as in both beer and speech.  A lot of Perl
  developers probably have sentiments toward the latter sort of
  freedom especially.  Perl Builder is nicely done, but in a way
  doesn't do *all that much* more than some good free text
  editors.  Is it worth giving up both a couple hundred dollars
  and access to the IDE's source to use Perl Builder?  I guess my
  answers is "probably" -- I am not particularly poor, but am
  quite ideological.  So Perl Builder might be a mixed-bag for
  me.  But in the end, using Perl Builder doesn't do anything to
  restrict the source code I develop using it, and it is quite
  likely to save me a fair number of hours of work in the
  meantime (should I ever become less confused by Perl).


ABOUT THE AUTHOR
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  If David Mertz were more paraleiptically inclined, he might
  deny his subliminal endorsement of another P--- language.  You
  can reach him at mertz@gnosis.cx, and find copious biographical
  details by rooting around at http://gnosis.cx/publish/.

