TECHNICAL TIPS
Making websites more accessible to persons with disabilities (part I)

David Mertz, Ph.D.
August 2000

    Tips on making your web pages and web sites disabled-
    accessible.  Part I gives a general introduction to
    disability issues, and discusses the structural markup at the
    heart of HTML.  Part II discusses specific HTML coding
    "gotchas" that make your pages unnecessarily difficult for
    vision and mobility limited people to use; part II also
    provides an overview of free tools to use in evaluating and
    improving the accessibility of your site.


ISSUES TO START THINKING ABOUT
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Making your web site friendly to--or at least usable
  by--persons with disabilities expands yours audience; in some
  cases doing so might be mandated by law; and in every case, it
  is the -right- thing to do.  Moreover, many of the techniques
  that go into making more disabled-accessible web pages wind up
  making web pages that are just plain -better- for everyone.

  People have a variety of differing abilities to operate
  computers, and corresponding to these abilities (as well as to
  their ability to pay for technologies) disabled persons employ
  a variety of tools and techniques to mediate their access to
  the internet.  Blind or seriously visually impaired people
  might use screen readers or brail readers to translate pages.
  People with other visual impairements might use screen
  magnifiers, or might be unable to make color distinctions.
  People with neurological and mobility limitations might have
  difficulty operating a mouse and/or a keyboard; they might use
  special keyboards or spoken input to replace these.  People
  with hearing loss or deafness will not be able to use sounds
  included in pages.  And yet, all of these people are able to
  comprehend and utilize many types of information and
  functionality on the web... and probably most of the actual
  -information- on your web site if you take the effort to allow
  them to.

  There should be no reason why persons with disabilities should
  not be able to read about your organization or company, order
  products from you, complete forms and launch server processes
  (of the sort you implement), or participate in discussion areas
  (if you have them).  If your site closes these options to
  persons with disabilities, the only reason is bad design on
  your part.


THE VERY GOOD DESIGN OF HTML
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  HTML was designed as a means for *structural* markup of
  hypertextual content.  It was really -not- designed as a way of
  doing desktop publishing or graphic design, despite the number
  of tools that have tried to shoe-horn HTML into those
  functions.  If you stick to the intention of HTML when you
  create HTML, you are probably 90% of the way toward making your
  site accessible.  For example, any technical means of rendering
  a web page will have some reasonable way of conveying concepts
  like: "this is a paragraph", "this is a hyperlink", "this is a
  secondary heading."  The basic semantic of structural elements
  will be rendered by speech synthesizers, or by brail, or by
  three-inch tall onscreen fonts.  What might not be rendered in
  a manner appropriate for a header is something that you try to
  make *look* like a header by putting it in a certain font size,
  face, color and style, but without actually marking it with an
  <h2> tag or the like.  Fortunately, style sheets let you do
  both things at once:  mark something as an HTML header, but
  -recommend- that the browser render the header in a certain
  way (but only if it make sense for the browser and user).

  On the input side of things, HTML forms are equally well
  designed.  Every entry field identifies itself by the type of
  information it enters, and reasonable means can be used to
  enter these abstract types of information without a mouse, or
  with special keyboards, or with voice recognition.  The only
  time that entry is likely to exclude disabled users is when you
  go a long way out of the way to perform entry in ways that
  avoid the simple HTML form methods--such as Javascript tricks,
  Java entry applications where they are not needed, or special
  plugins (which are also likely to be platform restricted).  For
  example, I have found an annoying habit of some web-sites to
  have forms with a graphical "Submit" button that cannot be
  reached in tab order, but only with a mouse-click (it takes
  some extra work to program this in the first place!).  This
  needlessly excludes the blind and those who cannot use a
  mouse--as well as annoys sighted typists like me who -prefer-
  to keep my hands on the keyboard.

  Quite aside from disabled users, a wide variety of new ways of
  viewing web pages are growing in popularity.  PDA's,
  cell-phones, pagers, car-dashboard displays, embedded devices,
  kiosks, and other types of unconventional web-display machines
  are likely not to support the same display, plugin and input
  assumptions you might make for conventional PCs. A lot of the
  issues relevant to new devices are surprisingly similar to
  disability issues.  And good HTML works everywhere.


RESOURCES
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  An excellent starting point for many accessibility issues is
  The Disability Rights Activist.  This site provides links to
  laws, guidelines, and downloadable software:

    http://www.disrights.org/dr-web-access.html

  Many high-quality detailed suggestions for accessible web site
  design can be found at the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines
  1.0 (W3C Recommendation 5-May-1999):

    http://www.w3.org/TR/1999/WAI-WEBCONTENT-19990505/

  The law surrounding mandated web site accessibility are complex
  and differ between countries.  In the United States, the main
  law governing this is the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
  of 1990.  Links to many national laws and related pages can be
  found at:

    http://www.w3.org/WAI/References/Policy#USA


ABOUT THE AUTHOR
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  {Picture of Author: http://gnosis.cx/cgi-bin/img_dqm.cgi}
  David Mertz has been consumed with ressentiment since the
  introduction of the <blink> tag in Netscape 2.0.  David may be
  reached at mertz@gnosis.cx; his life pored over at
  http://gnosis.cx/publish/.  Suggestions and recommendations on
  this, past, or future, columns are welcomed.



