XML MATTERS #19: More on XML and Compression
Block-Level Algorithms and Resource Loads

David Mertz, Ph.D.
Compactor, Gnosis Software, Inc.
February, 2002

    An earlier installment of this column examined techniques by
    which XML documents can be reversibly restructured to improve
    compression.  For large XML documents and embedded processes,
    however, restructuring an entire source prior to a
    compression pass might be impractical.  This installment
    examines how well restructuring techniques can be adapted to
    block-level processing--both in terms of compression
    improvements and CPU/memory requirements.


INTRODUCTION
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  XML documents, as is well known, tend to be quite large
  compared to other forms of data representation.  Of course, in
  balance to this, the simplicity and generality of XML makes it
  worthwhile, despite its verboseness.  Much of the time, in
  fact, the size of XML really makes no difference--DASD is
  cheap, and the time on the wire might be only a small part of
  the total time in the process.  But at other times, bandwidth
  and storage space can be important.

  To quantify matters, it is not at all unusual for XML documents
  that represent table-oriented data to be three times as large
  as a CSV or database representation, or even than a flat file.
  A similar increase is typical in representing EDI data (such as
  for ebXML projects).  In many of these context, one starts out
  with multi-megabyte data sources, and making them multiple
  times larger can be inconvenient, especially for transmission
  purposes.

  When one thinks about compressing documents, one normally
  thinks first of general compression algorithms like Lempel-Ziv,
  Huffman, Burrows-Wheeler, and of the common utilities that
  implement variations on them.  Examples of such utilities are
  'gzip', 'zip', and 'bzip2' (and library versions of each).
  These utilities indeed tend substantially to reduce the size of
  XML files, most especially 'bzip2'.  Fewer people are aware of
  PPM techniques for compression, which can generally compress at
  even higher rates than 'bzip2'--but at the cost of an even
  higher time requirement than the already sluggish 'bzip2'.  The
  reigning "king of the hill" for compressing XML documents is
  'xmlppm', which utilizes some XML-specific techniques similar
  to those presented in this column; however, 'xmlppm' is several
  orders of magnitude slower, and unboundedly more memory-hungry,
  than the 'xml2struct' presented here.  But if you have the time
  and memory, 'xmlppm' achieves astonishing compression rates.

  It turns out that one can obtain considerably better
  compression rates by utilizing the specific structure of XML
  documents to produce more -compressible- representations.  The
  XMill utility is an implementation of this technique (as is
  'xmlppm', in a somewhat more sophisticated way).  However,
  previous techniques for combining XML restructuring with
  generic compression algorithms have operated at the level of
  entire XML documents.  This is true of XMill, of 'xmlppm', and
  also of my original 'xml2stuct' utility.  The general
  principle behind all these techniques is to to locate
  relatively homogeneous parts of a document, and group them
  close to each other in a transformed file.  After such
  grouping, standard compressors compress better (higher ratios,
  but even nominally faster also).  In particular, XML gives a
  strong clue that portions of a document are similar by
  enclosing them in same-named element tags.

  If one must deal with many-megabyte XML documents, however,
  spending the memory, disk space, and CPU overhead to manipulate
  huge documents is often impractical.  What would be nice would
  be if one could take not the entire multi-megabyte source, but
  only parsed blocks read serially, and apply similar techniques.
  It is noteworthy to recall from the prior installment of this
  column on this topic, that the Burrows-Wheeler algorithm
  applied "generically" performed much of the same restructuring
  that 'xml2struct' performs using knowledge of XML (thereby with
  similar compression results).  However, the effectiveness of
  the Burrows-Wheeler algorithm depends in large part on being
  able to perform global analysis on large inputs sources--we
  find in the below quantitative analysis that Burrows-Wheeler
  loses all its advantages when addressing (relatively) small
  serial blocks from XML documents.  The restructuring-pass
  techniques retain their effectiveness to a much larger degree
  under this constraint.


USAGE SCENARIO
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  There are a variety of practical purposes the block-level
  restructuring/compression techniques addressed in the paper
  can be put to.  The very simplest case is one where XML files
  are relatively large (e.g. hundreds or thousands of megabytes),
  memory and disk-space moderately constrained (e.g. there are
  not gigabytes of extra memory/storage available for the
  process), and channel costs comparatively expensive (e.g.
  transmitting a half-gigabyte is a worthwhile savings over
  transmitting a gigabyte).  The scenario for the simplest case
  would utilize a protocol like the below:

      0. Machine A has both a channel to Machine B and a large
         XML source (either a file or some dynamic generation of
         XML content).
      1. A SAX parser on A, "flushes" its data each time a block
         worth of source XML has been encountered.
         a. The flushed block is restructured.
         b. The flushed block is compressed by conventional
            means (i.e. 'gzip' or 'bzip2').
         c. The restructured/compressed block is transmitted.
      2. Machine B receives blocks over the channel.  The
         underlying XML is reconstructed in a serial fashion.
         Each block of XML could be appended to a file; or it
         could itself be fed to a SAX parser that acted on the
         elements and contents (and discarded once processed).


AN OVERVIEW OF THE TECHNIQUE
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Very little in the restructuring technique of 'xml2struct'
  needs to be changed from earlier work to accommodate arbitrary
  block sizes.  The article archive contains two implementations
  of block-level restructuring.  A Python implementation follows
  closely the pattern of the 'xml2struct.py' utility presented in
  _XML Matters #13_--the code is also much more compact and
  easier to follow.  An "optimized" C implementation was also
  developed to examine the speed performance of the algorithm.

  In the original algorithm, a list of tags was included as the
  first delimited section of a restructured XML documents.  This
  list of tags--generated on an ad hoc basis during the actual
  document parsing--was used as an index for single-byte tag
  placeholders used in a structure schematic.  The strategy of
  using byte index value in the place of tags itself reduces the
  size of restructured documents somewhat, but also limits the
  algorithm to handling DTDs with fewer than 254 distinct tags.

  Under the block-level revision below, we instead assume that a
  taglist is available independently.  A utility function to
  create a taglist from a DTD is provided in the article archive.
  Assuming both sides of the channel have the requisite DTD,
  everything works--shy of a DTD, any other format that specifies
  the order of tags works too.

  The only significant revision needed was the addition of a new
  (first) delimited document section to indicate current element
  nesting.  In the original, every start tag was paired to an end
  tag.  But since XML documents are broken at arbitrary
  positions, it is necessary to record a stack of "open" elements
  at the point a block begins.  The first block parsed has an
  empty field for this first section; subsequent ones are likely
  to have one or more bytes listing tag indexes that have not yet
  been closed.

  The format of a restructured block is rather simple:

      BLOCK FORMAT:
      1. List of open tags.  Each start tag is a single byte (w/
         byte value >= 0x03); this list is pushed on to the
         taglist stack to match corresponding close tag bytes.
      2. A section delimiter: 0x00 (the null byte)
      3. A compact representation of the block document
         structure, where each start tag is represented by a
         single byte, and the occurence of content is marked by
         a 0x02 byte.  A close tag is represented by a 0x01 byte,
         and must be back-matched to corresponding start tag.
      4. Another section delimiter: 0x00 (the null byte)
      5. The contents of all the elements indicated in the
         document structure schematic, grouped by element type.
         Each individual content item is delimited by a 0x02
         byte, while the start of elements of a new type is
         delimited by a 0x01 byte (the last not strictly needed,
         but it makes reversing the transformation easier).

  Two limitations of the demonstration code should be noted.  The
  first is purely a product of research implementation
  convenience.  Element attributes are not handled by the current
  parser.  This is primarily to make the presented code easier to
  follow, and adding like-attribute blocks would be a
  straightforward extension of the current technique, and are
  unlikely to appreciably affect compression or performance.

  A second limitation is more consequential.  Blocks are only
  flushed when end tags are encountered.  If the PCDATA content
  of single elements are not consistently smaller than the block
  size used, no enforcement of the block size is performed.  For
  example, a huge XHTML document that contained one big '<pre>'
  element would not enforce any reasonable block size.  It might
  be possible to change this limitation--although doing so would
  by inelegant within a SAX framework.  However, there is little
  point in lifting this, since reorganization will be
  inconsequential for documents with element contents larger than
  the block size (and should not be performed in general).  The
  one situation where a problem could arise is when an
  implementing system has a hard limit on available memory, and
  encounters a block too large to process.

  In the normal case, input XML blocks will be slightly larger
  than the indicated block size, but once single-byte tag
  placeholders are substituted for tags, the resultant size will
  typically be slightly smaller than the block size.  Moreover,
  once compression is applied to the block, the compressed block
  size will be considerably smaller than the input block size.


QUANTIFYING COMPRESSION
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  For purposes of quantification, I work with the same two
  representative XML documents addressed in my earlier research.
  One document was a prose-oriented document, an XML version of
  Shakespeare's _Hamlet_.  The second XML source document was
  created from a one megabyte Apache log file, with XML tags used
  to surround each field of the log file (and each entry).  The
  tags used were not particularly verbose, but the file still
  expanded to about 3 megabytes.

  On the below graphs, the two gray bars in the front represent
  the compression achievable with simple file-level compression,
  using 'gzip' and 'bzip2'.  As discussed above, file-level
  compression of large files might be impractical; but as
  expected, file-level compression achieves better results since
  it has the whole file to look for repeated strings in.  In
  general, one has to get up to blocks of 100 kilobytes or
  larger before the block-level compression pulls nearly even
  with the file-level compression.  Still, if one has to worry
  about gigabyte source documents, even a megabyte block looks
  pretty manageable in comparison.

  The green and blue bars at the back of the graph represent the
  compression achievable by compressing blocks without a
  restructuring pass.

  Finally, the red bar in the middle represents the compression
  performance of 'xml2struct.py', combined with 'zlib'
  library compression.  Better compression results would be
  obtained by using the bzip2 library.  This was not tested,
  however, because most anticipated future uses are likely to
  make the speed disadvantage of bzip2 prohibitive.  However, if
  bandwidth is more important than CPU time, adding a bzip2
  compression layer might enhance the benefits.

  Let us look at the results, then make some comments.  Block
  sizes of 1k, 10k, 100k, and 1M were tried.  First Hamlet:

  {Compression of hamlet.xml by different techniques:
   http://gnosis.cx/publish/programming/hamlet_compression_small.gif}

  Then a weblog:

  {Compression of weblog.xml by different techniques:
   http://gnosis.cx/publish/programming/weblog_compression_small.gif}

  The same general pattern occurs in both the 'hamlet.xml' and
  'weblog.xml'--but the pattern is *much* stronger in
  'weblog.xml' (the highly repetitive structure of a log file
  gives restructuring its strongest advantage).  At small block
  sizes, compression is much worse than file-level compression.
  Around 10k block size, block-level compression starts to look
  moderately good; and at 100k block size it becomes very close
  to the file-level compression techniques.

  The aspect of the charts that is most interesting for this
  paper is the compression characteristics of the restructuring
  block strategy.  Restructuring consistently improves on the
  behavior of simple block-level 'zlib' (around 30% for the web
  log, less for Hamlet).  At around 100k blocks, restructuring
  does better than file-level 'gzip', which is a very positive
  result.

  A surprising result is the behavior of block-level 'bzip2'
  compression.  As one would expect, once block size gets large,
  it makes no difference that block-level compression is used.
  But one has to get to the 1m size to wipe out the whole
  difference.  However, at small block sizes (1k especially, but
  even at 10k), block-level 'bzip2' does shockingly badly.  Prior
  restructuring is unlikely to improve this signicantly.  In
  fact, for the 1k block size 'bzip2' is consistently much worse
  than 'zlib'.


QUANTIFYING CPU USAGE AND TRANSFORMATION RATE
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Using the optimized C implementation of 'xml2struct', I
  examined the speed at which restructuring and compression can
  be performed.  If one imagines a use of these procedures
  as a channel intermediary, the ability of the process to
  saturate its output channel is of crucial importance.  The
  times presented here were gathered using the Linux
  'time' utility.  Elapsed time of runs is reported; each run
  showed close to 100% CPU usage, and was predominantly user
  time.  One surprise (to me) is that block size makes very
  little difference to the running times of any of the examined
  transformations.

  {Time Requirements of Transformations Chart:
   http://gnosis.cx/publish/programming/xc2_time_chart.gif}

  {Time Requirements of Transformations Table:
   http://gnosis.cx/publish/programming/xc2_time_table.gif}

  The general timing pattern is pretty clear.  Restructuring (in
  the C implementation) is quite fast; 'gzip' is even faster;
  'bzip2' is slow (PPM, incidentally, is another 10+ times slower
  than 'bzip2').  I included the running time of the Python
  implementation as a baseline.  The Python version is completely
  non-optimized (it could be made faster, but probably not more
  than 2x).  The quick summary of both the Python implementation
  and a 'bzip2' pass is that they are -too slow- for most channel
  saturation uses.

  What do these running times mean for output channel saturation?
  A three megabyte file can be restructured in slightly under a
  second on a PIII-733, with block size making only a small
  difference to the speed of restructuring.  Compressing the
  restructured file with 'gzip'/'zlib' adds another quarter
  second to the process time.  This works out to approximately 20
  megabits/sec; in other words, a PIII-733 performing
  'xml2struct'+'gzip' can saturate two 10 megabit ethernet
  channels, or about 13 T1 lines.  A slow Pentium if dedicated to
  the 'xml2struct' process, should suffice to fill a T1 line
  (which is dedicated to transmitting XML documents efficiently).
  Going in the other direction, a Intel P4 or AMD Athlon running
  at clock speeds over a Gigahertz, should be able to satisfy the
  requirements of a 45 megabit T3 line.


CONCLUSION
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  The structure of documents significantly affects their
  compressibility with standard compression algorithms.  Since
  XML encodes much detail of its semantic structure in its
  syntactic form, a "restructuring" of such documents can improve
  their compressibility.  Moreover, this paper has shown that
  such restructuring techniques are amenable to serialization
  using parsed blocks from large XML documents.  Moreover,
  'xml2struct' algorithm can be implemented in optimized C with
  peformance characteristics that allow it to saturate dedicated
  output channels from "XML servers", using current generation
  CPUs and currently common channel bandwidths.


RESOURCES
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  This article is based, in large part, on two longer whitepapers
  written for Intel Developer Services.  These (will) appear at:

    http://developer.intel.com

  This installment follows up on the investigation in _XML
  Matters #13_, "XML and Compression:  Exploring the entropy of
  documents."  The code and results therein provide useful
  background to this installment:

    http://www-106.ibm.com/developerworks/library/x-matters13.html

  The source code files mentioned in this article can be found in
  an archive at:

    http://gnosis.cx/download/xml2struct.zip

  The XMill XML compressor utilizes XML restructuring in a manner
  generally similar to 'xml2struct'.  Information and a
  downloadable version can be found at the below link.  The
  license requires a click-through, and the download page
  unfortunately seems to have a buggy script that does not allows
  downloads from all sites.

    http://www.research.att.com/sw/tools/xmill/

  Amazingly good (and correspondingly slow) compression of XML
  documents is provided by the utility 'xmlppm'.  A discussion by
  its creator, James Cheney of Cornell University, has the title
  "Compressing XML with Multiplexed Hierarachical PPM Models" (it
  can be found at the 'xmlppm' website):

    http://www.cs.cornell.edu/People/jcheney/xmlppm/xmlppm.html

  A number of pointer to the theory and implementation of
  "Prediction by Partial Match" (PPM) compression can be found
  at:

    http://DataCompression.info/PPM.shtml    

  The complete plays of Shakespeare can be found in XML form at
  the below resource.  The document 'hamlet.xml' used for testing
  purposes was obtained there:

    http://www.ibiblio.org/xml/examples/shakespeare/

  The 1994 paper _A Block-sorting Lossless Data Compression
  Algorithm_, by M. Burrows and D.J. Wheeler, introduced the
  algorithm known now as Burrows-Wheeler.  This technique is
  implemented in the fairly popular 'bzip2' utility:

    http://gatekeeper.dec.com/pub/DEC/SRC/research-reports/abstracts/src-rr-124.html

  Many Unix-like systems include 'bzip2' as part of their
  standard distribution.  For other platforms--or for newer
  versions--'bzip2' can be found at:

    http://sources.redhat.com/bzip2/

  I wrote what I believe is a good general introduction to data
  compression.  It can be found at:

    http://www.gnosis.cx/publish/programming/compression_primer.html


ABOUT THE AUTHOR
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  {Picture of Author:  http://gnosis.cx/cgi-bin/img_dqm.cgi}
  David Mertz believes that less is more.  David may be reached
  at mertz@gnosis.cx; his life pored over at
  http://gnosis.cx/publish/.  Suggestions and recommendations on
  this, past, or future, columns are welcomed.


