REVIEW OF CORNEL WEST _KEEPING FAITH: PHILOSOPHY AND RACE IN AMERICA_.
New York: Routledge 1993.  Pp. xvii + 319. ISBN 0-415-90486-2.

David Mertz

  One might compare Cornel West's _Keeping Faith_ to a military
  spy satellite whose camera suddenly shifts from a wide-angle
  view of an entire continent to a close-up snapshot of the
  postage stamp someone attaches to a secret romantic missive.
  Reading West's book is exhilarating, but in the same way a bit
  disorienting.

  _Keeping Faith_ is an exploration of many divergent areas of
  contemporary theory.  The four sections deal with cultural
  criticism, political philosophy, legal theory and practice, and
  race-theory.  To each of these philosophical areas, rarely so
  unified in the same thinker, West brings a common set of
  conceptual tools and traditions, developing and refining these
  common tools through these various diverse applications.

  The central goal of _Keeping Faith_, however, is to situate
  West himself - a late-20th century, black, Christian, Marxist,
  American philosopher and intellectual - within his historical
  and philosophical milieu; and beyond this to formulate how he
  can, within this position, adopt an effective politics of
  resistance to racism, sexism, homophobia and class-oppression.
  West's method of self-situation is an alternation between broad
  characterizations - perhaps even homilies (though homilies of a
  particular post-Marxist sort) - of some major portion of world
  history of the last five hundred years and poignant, detailed
  analyses and criticisms of particular idiosyncratic figures
  within this history.  For example, in the first chapter, whose
  goal is to characterize, grandiosely, the intellectual
  ramifications of historical 'European breakthroughs in oceanic
  transportation, agricultural production, state consolidation,
  bureaucratization, industrialization, urbanization and imperial
  dominion' (5), the characterization is performed by a serious
  of snap-shots of a few important, but decidedly singular,
  intellectuals such as Matthew Arnold, T.S. Eliot, Lionel
  Trilling and Franz Fanon.

  Where West's brilliance really shines is in the details, not in
  the somewhat generic descriptions of broad areas.  The second
  chapter provides a short introduction to the meanings of
  literary canon formation, and particularly to contestations
  surrounding the meaning and creation of an African-American
  canon.  The chapter is useful as such - perhaps usable in a
  literary theory course.  Hidden inconspicuously within this,
  West remarks (without even mentioning _The Signifying Monkey_
  by name) that Henry Louis Gates, Jr. 'goes astray because [he]
  proceeds on the dubious notion that theories of criticism must
  be developed from literature itself - be it vernacular, oral or
  highbrow literature - a religious belief in the magical powers
  of a glorified set of particular cultural archives' (42).  This
  must be read as a fundamental critique of Gates' pivotal book -
  and yet it is delivered as no more than an offhand comment,
  occupying a single paragraph.  The shock is that West is
  probably right.

  As insightful as the almost aphoristic analyses liberally
  sprinkled throughout _Keeping Faith_ are, West is best when he
  -does not- operate in this manner.  Rather than alternate
  between overview and microscopic detail, the best chapters
  adopt a middle-focus which provide more substantative and
  argumentational criticism.  The best of these are within the
  division, -Philosophy and Political Engagement-, and the best
  chapter within this division is that on Fredric Jameson.  As
  well as allowing West to consider a recurrent theme of his
  through the lens of Jameson's theoretical work - the relation
  of ethics to epistemology - West enters into a critical, but
  sympathetic, dialogue with Jameson over the meanings and
  working of such Marxist fundamentals as ideology and history.

  West is clearly drawn to a close link between ethics and
  epistemology, particularly to a prioritization of the first
  over the second.  We can see West wrestle with this equation
  both in his sympathy towards Dewey and Royce who conclude that
  'truth is a species of the good' (110) and in his discussion of
  Jameson's and Northrop Frye's use of such an equation.
  However, West wishes to resist this equation, and such makes up
  his central criticism of Jameson.  The problem with
  deconstructing epistemological presuppositions to arrive at
  ethics conceptions, even if these ethical conceptions are ones
  which -go beyond- good and evil, is that these efforts just do
  not go far enough.  West scolds Jameson - but simultaneously
  scolds the post-structuralists whom West thinks Jameson does
  not succeed in distancing himself from - that Jameson has
  failed the Marxist (and Pragmatist) lesson of taking history
  seriously.  West remarks on p.186, against both Jameson and
  post-structuralism, 'What is distinctive about the Marxist
  project is that it neither resurrects, attacks nor attempts to
  "go beyond" metaphysics, epistemology and ethical discourses.
  It aims rather at transforming present practices ...  Marxism
  admonishes us to "let the dead bury the dead."'

  Stylisticly, West seem overly enamored with taxonomic devices -
  as if simply saying there are three possibilities in a given
  matter does the necessary philosophical work (it -is- usually
  -three-, perhaps in homage to Peirce).  Sometimes such listing
  clarifies the discussion, but other times the distinctions are
  peculiar enough to serve merely as distractions.  One finds
  taxonomies everywhere from a breakdown of materialist analyses
  of racism into genealogical, microinstitutional and
  macrostructural (268); to distinguishing Marxist thought,
  Marxism and Marxist theory (what one might more ordinarily call
  vulgar Marxism, actually-existing socialism and Marxism,
  respectively) (258); to breaking the three models for
  left-intellectuals into oppositional professional, professional
  political and oppositional intellectual groupings within the
  academy.  The last of these taxonomies, for example, is simply
  difficult to get a grasp on, despite ample examples and
  explanations of each; perhaps the vocations of
  left-intellectuals just are not divided so neatly as West
  wishes.  The shame here is not the West may be wrong in his
  categories, but that an excess concern with arbitrary
  categorization might distract the reader from his important
  discussion of the role of left-intellectuals.

  The topics impossible to mention in this review are myriad and
  fascinating.  They range everywhere from political critiques of
  architecture, to the role of African-American artists, to
  several chapters treating the Critical Legal Studies movement
  in various aspects, to contemporary post-Marxist theories of
  race.  _Keeping Faith_, I believe, truly establishes West as
  one of North America's premier philosophical minds.


