COMPARATIVE REVIEW

David Mertz
May 14, 1994

    Slavoj Zizek, _Tarrying With the Negative_.  Durham, North
    Carolina:  Duke University Press, 1993.  ISBN 0-8223-1395-2

    Judith Butler, _Bodies that Matter_.  New York:  Routledge,
    1993.  ISBN 0-415-90366-1

  These two children of the incestuous marriage between Lacan and Hegel
  share much of the same _modus operandi_.  For starters, they both
  continue to write the same book from year to year, although the
  formula is by no means yet exhausted in either case.  But in their
  latest efforts we can start to see the thread of interchange between
  the siblings, as Butler and Zizek sometimes explicitly, but mostly
  slyly, discuss each others' theoretical contributions.  In addition to
  the common lineage, there is a certain shared philosophical method to
  the writing of Butler and Zizek:  both masterfully interweave their
  theoretical contributions with expositions of cultural productions
  which illustrate and exemplify the theoretical moves.

  We get the impression from these books of high theory that theory
  itself, however abstract, is always a practical matter which is given
  meaning in its application to the ordinary cultural artifacts around
  us (novels, popular movies, TV commercials, etc.).  Zizek is, at
  points, quite explicit about the interpenetration of popular culture
  with high theory - for example, in the introduction to _Looking Awry_,
  he quite baldly claims that Hitchcock gives the "truth" of Lacan, and
  Lacan in turn the "truth" of Hitchcock.  The same assumption runs
  through all of Zizek's _practico-theoretical_ analyses.  Butler is
  perhaps more reserved on the relation of the practical to the
  theoretical, but we get hints of an understanding similar to Zizek's,
  for example in the final chapter of _Bodies That Matter_ which
  explores what the popular reappropriation of the word 'queer' means to
  the psychoanalytic structure of gender/sexuality categories.

  Between the latest books by Butler and Zizek one perceives a curious
  antithesis of form with content.  In Zizek's terms, one might call
  Butler an external negation of her imputed parentage - preserving the
  form while negating the content - while Zizek is an internal negation
  of such parentage - preserving content, negating form.   Whereas Zizek
  writes stylistically with a Nietzschean lightness while embracing the
  "totalizing" structure of Hegelian philosophy, Butler writes with
  Teutonic ponderousness as a critic of Hegel, and of systematic
  philosophy generally.  Likewise, Zizek, the defender of Lacan writes
  with a transparent clarity, while Butler, Lacan's feminist critic,
  might well be accused of the very obscurity which Lacan so perfected.
  Both Zizek and Butler are unquestionably profound thinkers, but the
  act of reading Butler is a process of extraction of insights, as
  puzzle pieces are cautiously fit into place finally to form a complete
  picture.  Reading Zizek, on the other hand, resembles nothing so much
  as reading a murder mystery:  one is drawn along by the colorful
  writing, only near the end to realize that all the clues to the
  theoretical structure have been slipped in inconspicuously when one
  finally experiences a Gestalt shift which brings the whole picture
  into focus.

SEXUAL DIFFERENCE
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  One of the theoretical issues addressed in both Zizek and Butler is of
  sexual difference.  Both books introduce strikingly novel approaches
  to an old question, although the answers are different (if not
  necessarily contradictory) from each other.

  For Butler,

    What in Lacan would be called 'sexed positions,' and what
    some of us might more easily call 'gender,' appears to be
    secured through the depositing of non-heterosexual
    identifications in the domain of the culturally
    impossible... (p.111).

  According to this logic, homosexuality is not fully repudiated, but is
  rather abjectly maintained in its necessity for maintaining the
  psychic structure of sexuation.  Specifically, Butler utilizes the
  Lacanian distinction between the Imaginary and the Symbolic to
  maintain that homosexual desire is inherently an Imaginary
  possibility, but is a possibility which must be performatively
  repudiated with assumption of a subjective position in the Symbolic
  register.  This repudiation of homosexual desire is by no means a mere
  developmental step which is done once, then over with.  Rather, this
  repudiation is repeatedly invoked with every act of speech from within
  a sexed position - since homosexual desire is, according to the
  dictates of the Symbolic Order truly "that love which cannot speak its
  name."

  Contained in Butler's analysis of "sexuation through abjection of
  homosexuality" is a critique of feminist/queer theorists who have
  maintained that homosexuality is a way out of the trap of gender (they
  are not named, but implicitly Wittig and Irigaray are the targets).
  By allowing that the condition of homosexual desire is a retreat to a
  purely Imaginary register, exclusive of speech within the Symbolic,
  such theorists fail to challenge - and perhaps even strengthen - the
  dictates of a compulsorily heterosexual Symbolic Order.  It is less
  than clear what the positive content of Butler's critique is, however.
  While she points to the "tacit cruelties that sustain coherent
  identity (p.115)," she nonetheless does not "suggest that identity is
  to be denied, overcome, erased (p.117)."  What, then, are we to do
  with these _cruel identities_? Butler hints that if not merely
  suffered, options might be to parody or destabilize identities.  The
  option not occurring, I think, to Butler in her systematizing binarism
  of totalizing identity or unachievable anti-identitarianism, is simply
  to _ignore_ identity - what I would like to call a "strategic
  indifference" or "revolutionary ennui."  Perhaps the dictates of cruel
  identities can simply be _suspended_ (in the sense of a suspended
  musical chord as much as in that of a postponed event) without
  mounting an impossible challenge to a totalizing compulsory
  heterosexuality/sexuation.

  For Zizek, as for Lacan,

    [S]exuality is the effect on the living being of the
    impasses which emerge when it gets entangled in the
    symbolic order, i.e., the effect on the living body of the
    deadlock or inconsistency that pertains to the symbolic
    order qua order of universality.  (p.56)

  This problem of the inconsistency of universality was posed first by
  Kant, in terms of his antinomies.  Kant, in specifying two type of
  antinomies, was the first philosopher to articulate sexual difference
  insofar as the mathematical antinomies of "not-all" parallel the
  feminine relation to the Symbolic Order, while the dynamical
  antinomies of universality parallel the masculine relation.  Lacan's
  famous maxim, "Woman does not exist," helps clarify the different
  impossible structures of masculine and feminine subjectivation.  It is
  precisely insofar as _women_ are necessary objects for the fabrication
  of a Symbolic Order - as in Levi-Strauss' "exchange of women" - that
  the Symbolic Order cannot account for the category _woman_.  The
  particulars exclude totalization according to a logic of "not-all,"
  just as the individual phenomenal existence of objects of experience
  exclude judgement about the universe as a whole (according to the
  structure of the mathematical antinomies).  _Man_, contrarily, can
  enter the Symbolic Order categorically, but only under the condition
  that he have no particular existence, but simply enact the phallic
  function.

  This logic of sexuation is duplicated in the contradictory options
  given in the Cartesian _Cogito_.  According to Lacan's analysis, the
  _Cogito_ creates a rupture between the pure form of the "I think" and
  the res cogitans, the substantial entity thought.  What the Cartesian
  deduction actually performs is not to create an equivalence between a
  substanceless act of thought and the contentless thinking substance,
  but rather to posit a choice between the two.  The two possible
  choices force the differentiation of sexual identities:  the masculine
  choice is the choice of being, at the price of thinking; the feminine
  choice is the choice of thinking/acting, at the price of existence.

FEMINIST CRITIQUES OF LACAN
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  It is apparently incumbent upon every feminist philosopher abreast of
  the French scene to develop her own critique of "Lacan's
  phallocentrism."  While whether Zizek would identify himself as a
  feminist is not clear, he is certainly a loyal son of Lacan, and hence
  will have nothing of these critiques.  Zizek quite correctly points
  out that the stock feminist critique of Lacan - that he maintains
  patriarchy by excluding women from subjective participation in the
  Symbolic Order - has no more than misunderstood Lacan.  As pointed to
  above, the exclusion of feminine subjectivity from the Symbolic is
  mirrored in a masculine barring of subjectivity as condition of entry
  into the Symbolic.  The exclusive masculine and feminine choices are
  that of being and that of thought, but neither allows for a
  thinking-being within the Symbolic.

  Butler, on the other hand, launches her own critique of Lacan (and
  Freud) in her chapter "The Lesbian Phallus."  After first dismissing
  Kristeva's false hypostasization of the maternal body at the site of
  the unsymbolizable Real, Butler explores the Lacanian construction of
  a bodily imago.  What is at issue in Butler's discussion is whether
  despite the fact that "Lacan explicitly denounces the possibility that
  the phallus is a body part [the penis] (p.73)" he covertly smuggles
  back in a biologism within the "phantasmatic figure of the phallus
  (p.73)."  In essence, Butler argues that such an error is made by
  Lacan on the basis of an ambiguity between the Imaginary and Symbolic
  position of the phallus, as between "The Mirror Stage" and "The
  Signification of the Phallus."  If "what operates under the sign of
  the symbolic may be nothing other than precisely that set of imaginary
  effects which have become naturalized (p.79)" then, indeed, a
  particular imaginarily invested (masculine) bodily organ may become
  determinative of the Symbolic Order.  But this seems like a mere
  misreading on Butler's part - it amounts to an insistence that Lacan
  must maintain all the tenets of "The Mirror Stage" while reworking
  them in "Signification;" Butler apparently merely refuses to recognize
  the fundamental epistemological break which occurred in Lacan (if she
  merely observes that "The Mirror Stage" is wrong, so what? - Lacan
  himself was its most radical critic).


OTHER TOPICS
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  The few points of intersection between Zizek and Butler discussed in
  this small space are only a tiny portion of the wonderful explorations
  in either book - not even encompassing everywhere the two intersect.
  For example, in her chapter "Arguing with the Real," Butler explicitly
  challenges Zizek's _Sublime Object of Ideology_ in it's construction
  of the Real outside of Symbolization - suggesting this fantastic
  otherness is really a ruse for what patriarchy simply does not want to
  acknowledge.  Elsewhere, Butler provocatively reads Zizek's
  provocative reading of Kripke's rigid designators - suggesting that
  both fail to recognize the originary role of _patronyms_ in all
  naming.  All such intersections are well worth reading, although space
  does not permit more explication here.

  Similarly worth reading are the quite spectacular ventures Zizek takes
  into territories not covered in his earlier books.  _Tarrying With The
  Negative_ marks the book at which Zizek first reaches back through his
  usual defense of Hegel against Hegel's defenders, to produce a quite
  stunning reading of Kant.  Or again, were anyone else to argue Zizek's
  claim that the series of operatic composers Monteverdi, Gluck and
  Mozart _exactly_ parallels the successive articulation of subjectivity
  through Descartes, Kant and Hegel, we would surely gape in disbelief.
  But somehow, when Zizek presents it it seems so natural that we wonder
  how anyone could fail to see such a thing.

  Butler is also not without quite a number of novel readings of
  culture, ranging from Jennie Livingston's film _Paris is Burning_, to
  the writings of Willa Cather and Nella Larsen, to post-gay-rights
  movements such as _Queer Nation_.  In all of these readings one finds
  refreshing appropriations of the works, which reflect Butler's
  underlying theoretical concerns.  Still, one isn't left with quite the
  feeling of a consistent project one is when reading Zizek;  clearly
  many of Butler's concerns are shared across her various readings, but
  whether each of these readings could really be unified into a common
  theoretical understanding is unclear.  With Zizek, in _Tarrying_, as
  with his other books, every unexpected turn into surprising areas of
  analysis carries with it a clear relation to the "Zizek-ian project."
  For all her originality, it is still not yet possible to speak in the
  same way of a similar Butler-ian project.

